O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh you, very cherished sons, I have completed this book which is the conclusion of the science of medicine, and filled it with its contents, and I have finished it by its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is extinguished from all to all, so it has perished the science and has been lost, and nothing remains but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the futility, and the minds are closed and the knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I can revive it along with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will bring along the forms of the irons of cauterization, and other instruments of the work with the addition of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	Because for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is lengthened.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who enters into this to surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of joints, and the movement of the veins moving and resting, and the source of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because, as Hippocrates says, we are not with the non-living, and with the work is little.
et meismement en l’art de main.	and even in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not familiar with the things mentioned before, so that they may not err and cause harm to men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	such that I have wanted many times to test these who interfere with this science and if they abandon themselves to ignorance and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish one who cut into an abscess of the neck or the breast of a woman, and cut the arteries of the breast;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	which caused so much blood to issue out that the woman died in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another foolish one who removed a stone from an old man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	and took with it a piece of the bladder, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called for the extraction, and saw the position of the misalignment and the size of the stone, and it was clear that if they cut it, it would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And another mirror who took in care the duke of our land who had the leg broken, and with the breaker got the wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the mirror pressed the break over the wound with great force, and did not leave any salve on the wound, and thus left it to the end;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he ordered that it not be moved little;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and thus waited until the leg was completely rotten and the feet and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to remove the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I saw it removed so was in the field and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all ways of healing the corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	And the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another method that would crush the abscess and make it worse, and then it would inflame due to the evil of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an abscess, when it is free of melancholic humor, it only needs that one touch with iron if it is not in a place where one can completely remove everything that is corrupt.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	Therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	That is to say, the first part where he has placed in many positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each chapter of this book where he has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore, it is important that you keep this, so that the evil people cannot harm you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your arms in a firm and steady manner, and use the best way possible, then by the grace of God, you will come to safety and be healed.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	And let the contagious diseases spread no further harm;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	And take your arms away from what causes you doubt, and be in such a state that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galenus says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	«Do not take up the care of a seriously ill patient unless you are called a foolish one.»
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatment into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical cautery, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of instruments, and the cauterizing irons, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and is ordered by the high chief just as the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we recall the work, it is necessary that I mention the quality of aid and the new harm from each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest spoken and most subtle science and the secrets kept;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and many wise men have spoken of this, and agreed to it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	but I shorten the words little by little, because I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that fire cauterization helps universally in all matters where there is matter, whether the matter:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	is to know whether the matter is hot without matter, and dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry weather together with the matter, they devised any and said that fire cauterization is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that fire cauterization is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and those who said the opposite claimed that fire cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes from people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and its moisture to the hot fire, you heat the body.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in all cases, one should not interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know by long use the chapter of cauterization, and the diversity of the complexions of people, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the symptoms and the space of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	We have no fear of other constitutions, even in diseases that are cold and moist.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the symptoms gathered and agreed to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and has greater goodness than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fever is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless it has a name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning remedies come from one member to another by separating them, and bring diseases of difficult healing to the affected member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	And perhaps it finds the pain.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The food for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make it sick, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is above the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And because I excuse myself from the length of speech, for I only like to give you the secret that is hidden or by fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	receive in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they should be made in what degree the cautery should be done, and ask for permission.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is beneficial in all cases, because the evils that come from it are removed by the help of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and indeed if it is for necessary pain, short and not able to wait until the greatest evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think like a fool, child;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and it says so thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, because cauterization is only a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more valuable than any other medicine for its swiftness of action, and by the power of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is a matter of fact that the sickness comes at no certain time according to the nature of the body and the part of the disease and its power;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and there are gathered in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless if cauteries are administered in the place where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of dense por la dolor, and similar things, and the pain does not return much;
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	and many people do not understand why cauteries are called the back of medicine, and that is to see;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that the fire cauteries are effective after medicine, but rather their intentions are false, and they use fire cauteries at the end of medicine because when we administer methods of healing in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the fire cauteries, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is necessary to carefully use cautery as a last resort in medicine, not according to the intention of those who are misguided.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they did not say why except for the quality of gold and its high value;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the points of the cauteries do not cause putrefaction, but it is not to see because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is so in some men;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	And gold cautery is better than iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And whenever you heat a gold instrument, do not hold it when it is hot because of the color of gold, and it has cooled slightly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much.
si font au feu;	then they do at the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cauterization that we have armed ourselves with for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I would order this chapter on the shoulder joints from the feet, because it is easier to find there.
dou cautere olivaire	The fire cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This fire cauterization is used for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the joint to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to many dreams and tooth pain, and throat pain, and also for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by solvent medicine changing the head III or IV times, depending on the virtues and age and custom of the hair that it can suffer;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make the head of the shoulder right again.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on top of yours;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after place the root of your palm above the root of his finger between his two fingers;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and let your middle fingers come out, if he bleeds from the wound then heat the cauterizing agent called "olive oil", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And put it on the wound with a feather, and move your hand slowly and steadily in returning;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand slowly, and reward the wound if you see the small bone of the forearm;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, restart the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	then take some thread, and put it in warm water and soft cotton inside, and put it on the limb, and leave it for three hours.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	then put on a soft bandage in butter.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the burn is healed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetra-farmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the old ones said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	and therefore to help them.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should burn the cauterizer so much that a part of the bone is burned away, and then remove what has been burned off from the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And they should apply the fire cauterizer as much more gently, and push it in as far as possible to break the bone as wide as a spoon that women put in their hair for the reason that the humors are pushed out moist.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one should leave the wound open long.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After that, one should cure and bandage it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be good for everyone at all times, unless in some men where there is a view of fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	And it seems to me that I should leave it.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the bones are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the affected bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and less painful for me, and from this I work in consequence with a similar method to achieve health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When the main cause of chronic pain and lasts for a long time, one should use the years and pills called "cochie", and head cleaning and eye and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does the cauterization that we have previously mentioned, and it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care when dealing with a patient who has a severe illness, and do not make them too cold.
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Therefore, use the fire cautery to treat it as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After applying the fire cautery to each horn of the skull to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and apply the "vasselz" cautery where it is needed.
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and place suction cups there.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and keep your hand steady so you do not press too hard against the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The hairs feel much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of that later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cautery of the horns be more subtle than that which is used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the illness has spread to the oil, and the patient is purged by medicines that are not effective, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and all this does not help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	therefore, the cautery is done in two ways, that is to say, by medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery by medicine is such that you hold a sharp instrument and remove the scab and the skin, and then make the temple or where the pain is located in some way so that you can replace the sharp instrument outside the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	And when it is reset, if the joint and the constraint are well done, let it rest for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	Then release and treat further with a poultice of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	Then place a cast on it soaked in butter until it becomes firm.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of the wound, until it is healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	And if you see that some burning remedies that I have written or advised for treating burns, are causing harm.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery with this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the main part is made in the shape of a clot or it has a little beak, and in the middle has a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful joint, and hold your hand and gently press the bone slightly, until half of the bone's width is exposed.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and gently press your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is below, and there is abundant blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After placing gauze on a string, and place it on the joint for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply wet gauze, and then treat the joint with oil until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", at all points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat migraine as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the fire before mentioned from medicine and iron does not suffice to alleviate the pain, then it is necessary that you extinguish the knife which is called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and let it rest on the painful limb for a line of half a finger's length, and take your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and that it does not come close to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and guard the jaw that moves when bent, and the nerves should only regard the moving part and that spasm should not cause pain, and guard against the escape of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting at a great risk and immediately to those who do not know, and which are not studied and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work in the middle way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cauterization does not suffice for the disease, and the wounds are painful, cauterize it with the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizer that has two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this fire cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines have been administered and other treatments that we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After poking all around the ear pain, or both where the pain is felt, and push it slightly away from the root of the ear, then you have identified the joint.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and have ten points around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the joint until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that should be cured by cauterization is no more than those that move the stream, as we have said in the division of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not use cauterization like those that come from blisters and sweat of the flesh.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you encounter this appearance of torture that moves from a stream of urine and spitting out of the mouth and choking, and it does not cease, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, and the other slightly behind the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	And place the cauteries in the part that opens healthily, and make the cauteries in the part above a little behind the ear, and another in the temple as long as a little finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and let the cauterization extend as far up as half of the wound is exposed;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the shape of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the similar shape of the cauterizing knife that we have placed before, but it is a bit more delicate and it should be a bit bigger;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after curing the limb as I have previously said, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then do four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	II above the II horns of the head, and I press the head, and I place the one which is called «vasselz» as we have already said, and behind the fire cauterizes above the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and so treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	of laziness
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, one should give the patient large and modified brain pills;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after rubbing the entire head of the patient with the mustard plaster which is written or treated in plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way of the fire cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is thus healthy, good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not, then make three cauterizations on the head by descending along the neck, and let there be space between each cautery of one large span;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat him as with the others, and if you see that he is stiff, and the pains are severe, then make one cauterization in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he is a laborer, two more on the two horns, and treat him until he is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	And let the cauterizations be called "olivare", as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and the flesh that we have previously mentioned.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	After removing the bad flesh, then perform cauterization on the head and each horn, and at the back and three times above the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	If you have more skill, and the body is wet and the bad flesh is suffering, and the disease is far, then perform four cauterizations above the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	And let it rest until the most skilled is satisfied, and release your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the treatment until they are healed, and the cauterizations called "olivare" that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use cauterization except for those that are bleeding, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the pain is great and suffering from lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot bear the suffering, give them gargling and chewing, changing the brain often with good meat.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the head is removed in the middle, and the cautery is performed as we have said before, and the cautery on the neck, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the pains are outside and severe, give them cautery as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be made with olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is intense, apply the subtle cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the excess or corrupted moisture is great, then use the cautery of parts as we have said for those who are paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excess declining towards melancholy is wet, then give it to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After healing the main injury;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After making a well-done tortilla, like a circle, and placing it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and if the wounds are crosswise, and held firmly from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	After applying the liniment, and it is good to use old birch bark butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it with fire at a moderate temperature, so that the patient can bear it when drinking;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	After removing the circle from inside and placing it on the head, let it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And do this to the wound every week with good management, until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you have seen cauterization done by making several pricks with the whole cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cauterization moistens the brain excessively.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Then place a wet cotton cloth on it and in goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the first sign comes to the eyes as I have indicated in the previous section, then begin and give the patient to drink a medicine mundifying the head, and keep it from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it several times a day on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After that, command him to turn his head, and perform the cauterization on the back of his head, and make two cautery marks on both temples, above and below the ear, where one is missing.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	And cover all the cauterization with veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cauterization extend along the length of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	And guard against bleeding from veins, and if you see too much blood coming out, stanch it with a piece of cloth that you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision, how you would do it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never cauterize or heat anything outside of the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or behind the arteries that are in the appearance of the main difference.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we see that it is an excess of cold fluorescent, therefore the cauterize that I have said at the beginning of the work, descending to those.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	The cauterize the main, and two cauterize above the two temples, and two cauterize outside of the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is more, then the wise one should cauterize it thoroughly with a small firebrand.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you apply medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then drink three drops of bad vinegar.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After that, the king's oil, and the middle heat of the olive oil cauterization.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	And make two cauterizations of the heat that is called "clavilis" on the two firebrands, a little away from the hooves.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and guard the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cauterization which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	For what purpose this form is used.
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the two firebrands as long as the firebrands are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave off the hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that does not hold the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Never is it the case that the hairs of the eyes are converted to parched, and they prick the eye, and if cauterization is done in two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	which is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are even, then place the hairs on your skin.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	After drawing a figure above the eyes that is as similar to the mirror as possible, and starting from the beginning of the sign below the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then place moistened cotton in glare of egg and musk of lavender on the oil, then heat the cauterizing iron to this shape.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing slowly and gently a few times, until the patient's skin is no longer sensitive in that place.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	And the signs of health in this work are that you see the eyes retreat, and the hairs stand up at the height of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	Then gently place your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put cotton wool on the burn until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come back, and the skin is softened, then begin the cauterization again on the same limb, as you did before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if the hairs are not enough, then cauterize until the skin is at its natural level and even, and do not prick the hairs with it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fiery cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	Then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one. Z., and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	And make it into a paste, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made like the leaf of the mint, and put it on the paper of the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	And if the disease holds only in one eye, then you must cover it with a cloth, and also do so in the other.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	And put some woolen cotton moistened in front of it.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	And the patient with the pain should be in a healthy position and put your other hand above the medicine, and press the poison and the mouth every time the pain feels the sting of the medicine, because it feels stinging also like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then you will have the knowledge of the remedy to your task.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the cauterization has been passed, lift the limb from the fire, and reward yourself if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, still put the medicine on the limb or the medicine has not worked until your work is equal and your eyes are fixed;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put cotton moistened in burre on the limb until the wounds are cleansed, then cure the limb of the burn which is called "diaphnesis" and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the task to stay within your work, be careful not to cut into the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then the treatment begins again on the joint that is softened properly by the paper, as you have done before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the fuller's thistle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And it is known that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to what your constraints are.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not reply the wrong way to him who has studied this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary to cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Command the patient to put his head in your hand.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and tie the assistant's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor remove its head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after put wool felt under or in the juice of parsley on the oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heat the cauterizing iron that is there:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and is shaped like a pen of vulture, together with the quill so that it be the cauterizing iron;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, if it is pointed at the head from one to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but anyway, this which is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing the fistula, it is opened, and through it, the pus is drained, and dried.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	And if it is closed, then open the wound, and drain the poisonous fluid out of it.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	After applying the cauterizing agent generously, hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the navel, so that your hand does not do harm.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	And apply the cauterizing agent to the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just at the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then begin the cauterizing agent again once more, and if you have the skill, leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	After placing moist cotton on the wound, and applying a drying ointment until it is healed, if after 40 days it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	And the treatment according to what it would come in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that no ancient people mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	For fistula, and fasten the limb;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After placing in the wound, the subtle instrument of which this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	And they make with the quantity of one ounce of lead;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	And hold the instrument firmly in your hand, and do not move the hairs until the lead melts and corrodes its oil;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on top of the wound, cotton oil moistened with urine in front of the inflammation or behind.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the plug if the hole of the limb of a fistula, and the healthy one by miraculous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer poultices to the wound, and bring the fistula back to the core of the wound according to what is proper for that limb.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracks in the lips that are called "hair", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing needle according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it firmly in those cavities until it comes just before it sets.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the limb of plaster until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the groin
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes at the root of the tongue or in the eye, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it is pierced and drained and swells and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the sections, and it does not improve:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you apply the fire cauterization according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the boil or rupture of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the bottom of the wound and behind the bone;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in the cures, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then you must reveal the bone and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the teeth are softened by moisture and the joints move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then put the head of the painful part in your mouth.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heating the cauterizer of its shape will come out after in some way that you put a cane on the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	And put the cauterizer deeply and hold your hand so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After releasing your hand and start the cauterizer according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After filling the pain with salt water, and the tissue for an hour and let it dry out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is now fixed, and the gum is softened by being held, and the moisture is corrupted and dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain from the tooth comes from cold, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a fresh cheese, and the end in an iron or silver spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and dip it in melted butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that dipping linen and cotton in melted butter does not work, then put the hot iron on the painful tooth until the heat reaches the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cauteries are such that you grasp a needle of iron or brass, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After heating the cautery, from which the form will come after, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauteries are cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be as strong the same day or the following day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the wounds fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauteries, and then the rich one.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	et c’est li forme dou cautere: This is the form of the fire cauterization.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the fire cauterization as you wish, and according to what you have at hand;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	This is the form of the knife.
des scrophules	of tumors
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrofula are cold and humid, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cauterization of hair from this after, and have two openings for the fumes to escape to the other side of the cautery.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And put the fire cauterization on top of the abscess once, or as often as necessary, until it reaches the base of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	And if it is an abscess, apply cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	Then place a piece of soft cloth soaked in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care for wounds and dressings until they are healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the uterus:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture is strong in the pores of the skin, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to first remove the pains by means of solutions.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	Then apply cauterization to the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn it with a strong heat but with a small amount.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After the other cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and it is the cauteries that are called "claviere" by which we have the shape in front.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal the limb as we have said above until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the whole
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and the disease of pormon are from cold moisture, and the pains do not have fever or sweat, and the disease is ancient, then he should make two cautery above the forehead in his eyes.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and the other cautery between the breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and it is the cauteries that are called "claviere" according to the shape that is said in front.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, perform the fire cauterization by holding the entire cautery that is called "points" because of its form in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points be just to 30, or within.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient according to what has been said before, and let it be that the cauteries are applied at three intervals according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three of them in a cup.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After, let the hairs be shaved on his back and on his ribs;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After, relieve the part that is within the ticklishness of two fingers of your right hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	And if its joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery that has two needles at the end in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the part until it pierces to the ribs, and bring the figure of the cautery together with four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and because of this, the fire cautery is made with the cautery that has three prongs, for the reason that the shape of cauterization is these three cautery.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are according to the thinness of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three prongs.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never are they placed on this one nerve because it has eight cautery.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After putting the cautery on top, press with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After allowing the wound to rest, and not making the limbs too long by stretching them until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, this thing happens quickly, then make a cauterization above the thick part of the cauterizing knife, or with many cauterizations in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is covered by moisture and is healthy of the pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and much moisture until it is at its condition, and are multiplied by vomiting to him, and are customary ways of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Because of this, after making three cautery with the fork from the least amount of one dog, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cautery before the two ribs until the shape of the cautery is at three angles, and has equal space between them so that they are not joined together when they are moving;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the fire cauteries be so sharp that they pierce both parts of the wound, and let the shape of the cauteries be according to this form without jostling:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	and if you see that a great cauterization is being done in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and the one who has fear of this cauterization, cauterize by pricking and holding above the stomach i.e., not according to the quantity that you see of it;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the whole cauterization called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes from pain and moisture and great swelling, as long as it is forced out of its natural condition by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the pain is treated with what we have said in the sections, and it does not help him much, so it is necessary that the pain be removed from its base.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, under the hypochondres, where the neck of the swan comes;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be space between each cauterization the thickness of a finger;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterization be long along the body, and do not press much with your hand on the cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it be arched as much as only half of the curve, and let the hairs be straight up on their feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him lie on his side, extend his legs, and loosen his breeches.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if you wish to, then cauterize these cauteries with a surgical knife, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all at once, for you would make the whole body harder;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to boiling, for the wounds are very delicate in that place, and the hard parts to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you know whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If he is in the carriage, he does not feel the pain much.
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	And if he is on the bed, he feels the pain greatly.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this cure lies down, it is necessary that the pain be above his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then the lord of the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizing agent which is similar to rice, from which this form is made:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize the cauterizing agent until the wound is sealed, and it comes just to the surface, until the suppuration is completely gone;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the cure according to the cure of bandages until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is only appropriate for this cauterization to be used by none other than those who have long studied the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be bravely overcome, and in all ways, it seems to me that it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The cautery of the chest
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should apply a cautery of aristolochia roots in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a long aristolochia root, the longest you can find, and let it dry, and let it be as thick and long as your fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and grind it in oil, and put it in the fire, and apply the cauterization between the nape and the neck, and use two small cautery irons to burn on the part that is outside the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	And the second fire cautery between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining behind a little.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	And the first fire cautery at the worst place, and the second above the stomach, and the third between the shoulders, and the fourth on both sides before the fire cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	And do not press too hard with your hand, but make it open as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And they said no ancient one that any man uses a fire cautery like the razor, and they clean it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and it jumped out of its place, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the wounds are fatal now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the mouse disease that we have said about divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of fire cauterization that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	When one method is such that you make three or four cauterizations, along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand too much on the entire cautery, and let the hairs be above its back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	And another method of cauterization is that you heat the cautery with two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and relieve the curvature that is near the mouse, where the pain of the hair comes from the side, and let the elevations that you relieve the curvature along the curve, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After applying the second cup, let the flames reach as far as the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus you will have four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see that it has been cauterized with the entire cautery at three cups.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has grown worse due to prolonged tension, and this is appropriate that the other cures before mentioned should be done.
de ydropisie	of hydrocephalus
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Caustic is not good for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclepiades".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	If your treatment according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the worst place.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the wound.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leaving the cauterization open for a while to prevent scarring, and do not neglect the care of the wound after the cauterization;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing will proceed quickly, and together with God's help, the two intentions will be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cauterization for the belly is as shown in the figure we have before us;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and the one for the back is olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen to one who is hydroptic, and are plain of a yellowish hue, you must cauterize above the back between the auricular and annular;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	And lightly touch the wound with the fire cauterizer, heading towards the opening.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, thus avoiding the yellowish part, and let the cauteries be done in this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After making two incisions on each leg at the tip of the knife;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	And either cauterize the longer one behind the knee in front and the other in front of the leg inside;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations overlong to cure, as it is better to do so.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and in the intestines are affected, and cannot be cured by other methods of treatment.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and of great virtue, then apply a large cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken of before or cauterization of the stomach, the cauterization circulates.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and IV cauterizations around the neck delicately to all cauterization of the cross, and II cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see abundant moisture and the pain is intense, then perform fire cauterization on the base of the nail, and I cauterize each one, and II small cauterizations above the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of wart
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the emorrhoids are at their foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not improve, then apply cauterizations:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	III above the spine of the back, which is completely undisturbed and gradually triangular, and I cauterize II below the ribs.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	et if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swells, then the face is cauterized above the stomach as previously mentioned, and the other above the liver, and the other at all the cauterizing knife;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cauterizing knife remain long and tense.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing, the limb as long as it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage that is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	when you cut the skin, if the cauterizing knife seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the skin that is being cut;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	et let your hand approach as the fire cauterizes the vein at its birth, of which there is no pain.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	Do this once or twice, and if there is much bleeding, cauterize as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	After applying ointments until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	And if you cauterize with a large firebrand, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wound cannot be suffered by a lancer or opened, as we will tell you in its place, if it is an illness that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any comes with fistula, and is awake and given porridge and corrupted moisture, then you must apply a thin tent to all of it, and guard that you wash the tent as much as it has of purity.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the cautery to the sharpness of a razor, and inserting it into the fistula according to the amount that enters, and then reapply the cautery as long as the corrosion and decomposition are sufficient, once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and guard against the veins that are within, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, then guard against these paths, and do not make any other movements except in the belly, and think that it is not healed.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after curing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if the wounds are closed, and the matters are removed along with time, then cure that the wounds are completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matters are not removed, close the wound and corrupt the bone at the source.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	And thus, as one of those that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes to rain, and great moisture, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cauterization on both sides of the rain with the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	And if we cauterize it in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a row, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and thin from cold and moisture, and the hairs retain the urine, then make a fire cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the beginning of the hair begins, and on the right and left, and let each cauterization be as long as a pin.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and the first fire cauterization after the back, or II if you have a strong desire for it.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the fire cauterizer be applied according to the form previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the wound is cold and moist, and does not leave any trace to be conceived, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is late;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, if they feel great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	therefore it is necessary to apply the third fire cauterization around the wound, as we have said or the fire cauterizer of the bladder, and two fire cauterizations after the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the fire cauterizer be applied as we have said.
de la hainche	of the belly
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When moisture descends to the bottom of the back, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found in the lower parts of the back, then you should cauterize the pain above the bottom of the back with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign it in front of the joint around the back so that it returns, so that the back is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cautery is such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if this cautery is not present, then make three cauteries of large olives, and the cautery should be applied as usual to all the careers;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the cure as long as they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes in the side of the belly, and it is from cold and moisture, and the pains are treated as we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the pain of large humors with bad-smelling pills, or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you do the cauterization;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cauterization is according to the two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	1. The fire cautery is performed in many ways, such as:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	2. you cauterize the sac of the hip III triangular cauteries in this form, and it makes good depth and great, and has between each cauterization a space of the size of an egg, and let the cauterizing oil.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	3. one never cauterizes in the middle of the hip joint, because it is there with four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	4. and if you see, if it cauterizes with the cauterizing circle that we have previously mentioned in the hip dislocation;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a way that the circle contains all the waist, and all the spines are straightened.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in lithotomy, when the pain is in the groin and does not reach up to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then make two cautery marks where the hairs are, and one above the ankle four times, on the right side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery marks be even, and straighten the spine.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the hairs feel that the pain extends to two fingers or near the bone, then cauterize where it feels the pain three or four times at the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the profession requires it, do more of it.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is located from the groin to the thigh, perform cauterization with a point or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have also seen many who have done cauterization above the ankle of the foot, and left it for so long that the leg was completely numb, and the feet as well, and all the feet were rotten and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of vomiting that resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is on both sides together, perform cauterization on one and the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise say in the cauterization of the loins, regarding this method, take such a needle and make it as large as a navillon of a finger, or slightly smaller, and make it with interstices and make one interstice join to the other at the distance of the quantity of a new penny.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	And let there be pliers over two parts, and also like a nose, and there should be one well-made iron tongs;
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is completely red and gives off a scent, and then place it on the back of the bad shoulder, and turn it over to the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the cautery once the heater has cooled and leave for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use this cauterization little due to its fearsome appearance, and few see those who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And therefore, this is a bad cauterization, which can suffer, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cauterizing instruments of medicine are such that you make an instrument for piercing through the edge of the door, and either of brass or iron at one end, and in the top has II us, and between each the quantity of the size of a doe;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they should be overturned and above, and they join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the board of the back lying on its side, and quickly place your hand high on the board of the back.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After pouring between the two circles of the hot water which is heated by the fire into a pot, and let it stand for an hour with low heat, and suffer the patient with the heat and burn of the.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it also has the effect of biting as if by fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the biting has passed, loosen your hand with the instrument and lift the back of the hot water gently, and let it stand for three hours, and put on butter until the black part of the burn is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it remain three days to ripen;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of wounds until they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the same instrument that you have used in the buttocks, increased.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of hot water, and I wrote it to treat the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take chalk and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or if there is a small puncture other than the tip of a razor can be inserted;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put the other one can be well soaked in salt and alkali and soft water above, until there is the second above the powders that you have well soaked in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it remain so long as it descends like awake and cuts or could break down, then take all of it, and pour it over the charcoal and over the alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And if it is very hot, it should be administered in the form of work of other medical works and cauteries of other members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does harm like fire, and if there are other medicines that are well cauterized in the abdomen like this, and honey, and charcoal with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure that some people were cured of the pain of the back and sciatica, and it was very effective, and he said that no other cure was made, and that they were well after one time when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as he teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And in this way you should apply a fresh and dry green fig, and grind it very well with a little fat, and put on the abdomen and thigh and leg where the pain is, and bandage it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and he leaves it for three hours, during which time the pain is not felt anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	Then make the patient enter a hot bath until the heart is slightly warm, and then make them lie down, and the pain will go away completely and they will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And let it be known that no one should use such medicines with cauterization, unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the throat is cauterized with the wool of a goat, it helps a lot.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and it should be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and pour old oil into it, and place it on the groove that is between the thumb and the other one called the foreshaft.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry goat's wool and putting it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and placing it on the linen, and leaving it until it is soaked.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do again in the same way, and do not stop doing so until you think that it is approaching the back, and that the pain has ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and these methods of cauterization are called "goat's beard cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of great pain to two joints
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or by impact or from too great evacuation, or from similar matters spread out cold, none of these is as effective as cauterizing with hot matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is recommended that the hairs are removed with fetid powders or similar substances, which are applied on top of the wound, where the pain is, three lines deep, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the hairs can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and the cauteries are made according to the cauterization called "puncture".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make III cauteries or IV at the average cauterization called "clavière" in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow backs when they stand, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you push in the lower spinous process of the back and see what appearance comes above the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grasps every part of the spinous process.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spinous process with the fire cautery touching the second or third line, and they are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment, the limb should be kept as we have said, and you must not administer cauterization in a way that causes damage to the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	The pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that is spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which is properly called "gout", and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	Make much of the cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be done in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a time when you must hold the face down, then perform the entire cauterization as claimed by the term "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come from the groin and other joints, and often occur, then cauterize above each groin with three or four cautery irons of each part, using the oil cauterizer.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have more skill, then do more, but do not hold your hand too far from the patient until the spirit of cure is present.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pain descends to the jaw and the back, then administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then cauterize around the knuckles two lines deep.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	And if there is no pain after that, then cauterize above each joint and above the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	If the pains come from the back or shoulders, cauterize each part, and apply good care and many medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give good management and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When fracture comes in angles, and the bowels descend to the groin, and this is not new, then when you see it to cure, that it does not move more that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and that he uses things that lower the belly, so that the bowels descend from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	After, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to comb his hair until the bowels are returned, and tie them at your feet, and sign with your finger from above the broken bone of the thumb, and to all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery of this kind, which is in the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	so long as it is white and sweats scents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	then reset the dislocations at their joints.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the assistants wipe their hands above that they do not return backwards.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs at the hairs, and put a cloth and a bandage above them on the thighs, and the other below where he wipes his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery above the sign of your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then continue with another until you come just to the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and guard subtly so the pus does not escape when you perform the cauterization;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so you do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this means the hairs do not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And when you do not see the bone at the fire cauterization, your works are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cauterizations for children be subtle according to their age, and for large people also large according to their size;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days care for the wound of the cauterization with butter until the scab is hardened;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the care of other remedies until it is healed, and grind the hairs 40 days on their back until the wound is well healed;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that his bowel movements be loosened long before he enters the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage for forty more days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	And he should have good rest, work little and avoid too much overeating and drinking, and too much loud noise.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he does this instruction, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say what to do after the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow any more, apply the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be third-degree heat.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	After the cure as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with the fire cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the swelling of the limb and make a line across the width above the tear, and another below, and hold your hand on all the cauterizing iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or to fall or to be injured, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize with the cauterizing iron called «poins», and the cauteries should follow the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its strength and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If it is healthy and the first cautery is applied well, then it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If not, then begin another cautery above the first one, for it is usually customary that it should be allowed to die in the member that is closest, which is why you must make the cauteries until the hairs are healed.
de meselerie	of medical instruments
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Medical instruments are often not helped by cauterization due to great harm, and at the same time, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of fluids and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you see that the cautery has not taken effect, then take care if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not remain or disappear, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then make five cauteries above the chief:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I embrace the head with both hands, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the jaw.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and II above the two horns, and I behind on the hauterel.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let the hand be as far as the cautery comes to the bone, and as long as the scars come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the small one according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the wound is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it is evident that you should cauterize with these cautery we have said or at the head, and the cautery in the nose, and two cautery on the spine of the neck, and six cautery on the spine of the back, and one great one on the croup and one other below, and two on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and II above the ears, and II above the tendons of the little finger, and I above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wrists;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and guard against the nerves that are above the lower back, so as not to burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never perform a fire cauterization above the bone of the thumb, and I above the bone of the stomach, and I above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more you perform a fire cauterization, the less you should give aid, and move it less;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the hairs do not feel pain as much as healthy people do, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the methods of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the wound with flour several times with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When a swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you must cauterize over the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization go a little into the healthy flesh;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never cauterize with the hand and at the back and at the elbow, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if it is calcified the swelling;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in no way intervene unless they are known about the members and the outlets of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	For the barbarians
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is awakened, and medical treatment does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the amount of the spirits' strength, until the whiteness is stopped, and it is moved its color;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then the cure of flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of a pigeon and blood of a dove, of each one a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be mixed altogether, and let it be tied with a cloth, and let it be applied to the limb as long as it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancres by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancres appears at the beginning, and you see it stop spreading, then cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the chancres.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise people said that one should make a fire cauterization as in the middle of the chancre;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and this does not seem good to me, because I believe that it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the better thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the fire that is called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to die out or due to the excess that it causes or due to the age of the malady when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and they have little blood, or due to the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hurrying to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around the wound with many small cauteries by holding them;
aprés le laisse ensi.	then leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced by the entire cauterization, then warm up the cauterization from where this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the skin, and be such cauteries that the pain felt before is in a similar manner to the course of the porridge is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a piece of member, for it twists the members as if the dry reeds would.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauteries and fire together, then heat the small, sharp cauteries greatly according to what is needed for the limb or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	then cauterize all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice with oil over the wounds until the burnt flesh is removed and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of boils, they generate carbuncles.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy pus does not appear, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if not, then restart the fire cautery on the part that has remained undamaged.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this method has never been treated with medicine in place of fire cauterization.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	But all fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already given the cure of medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Take it when you have the opportunity.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the peas that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it comes to the feet by defect, and a disease arises which is called "clubfoot" according to our understanding, and it is a great disfigurement that makes the foot ugly.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and water cauterization with hot iron.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cauterization is such that it heats the cautery hair as if it were a pen feather, and it should be made of good iron at the measure that it can pierce the nail of all parts, and that it has thin edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After you put everything on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the head of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay there for three days until it begins to rot.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Then make a poultice of wild savage crushed herbs with linen, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall off and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the joint with poultice applying hot char until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by the previous wound, and often in the hands and feet, then it is necessary to apply fire cauterization with very hot fire.
et est en teil maniere:	and in a similar manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	Take a needle of iron or steel, or a quill pen, and place it above the nail and the althelul, that is to say, the verucas.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	And place the needle above it so that it pierces all around, then put a little hot wax, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand back and forth so that the edge of the needle reaches the root of the nail, and find the hot wax penetrating to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	And suffer the pain a little from the burning of the hot wax for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	Then leave it thus, and it will fall off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	After doing another one like this, remove all those who are in the chest, then treat the boils that cause char.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some tremble from cold or fever quartan or other, it is necessary that you make four burns or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one on the belly, and one above the stomach at the cautery of the olive.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	It will let the trembling go, and it will hurry the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No times have appeared previously when the chest was bathed with pus and pustules that come from large corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If it is necessary at the first when they appear that one makes burns above each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a fine cauteries of willow bark, of which the point is grasped in the fire, or of the root of aristolochia long, or at the lens cauteries.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And often the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and it cannot grow into new ones, but breaks down the excess that comes from it, and are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the perforators, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very painful thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And in any case when it has to do with anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tight until the bleeding stops completely and no more comes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	Then, apply fire cauteries of olive oil, many small and large ones, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then, apply I, or large or small depending on the wound and the location where the artery is, and place the cautery above that vein or where you hold your hand, and keep the cautery until the blood does not flow out.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you have to lift your elbow quickly when lifting the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take the other cautery that is at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after another until the blood is stopped.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	And be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that other harm does not come to the wound.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	And be aware that when the vein is not cut, it cannot be stopped immediately when the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods that we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by strong ties of thread, or by medicines placed above that have the power to stop bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and either tied and restrained in this way.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers tight binding with cloths or other things burning above, or similar things, does not benefit if not done carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any remedy present, then they should put their finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and well compress it until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and they should not move it, but they should apply cold compresses often until it is very cold and the blood is congealed and stopped.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries about the matter of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cauterization or burning medicines, and their questions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have put that chapter of the neck down to the feet, and I will go to this chapter by the same way because it is easier to find what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater precaution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many methods of people come for cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if they come from such people who have become so with their illness that they die quickly because of the treatment they receive for their disease, and from the greatness of its evil.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and one must fear these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are those who give you their sense, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am ready";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	You should not grant permission to those who come to you with this manner, but put more caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain and what you have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ailments so that health may be converted.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to gain good reputation, and glory, and memory for the long time.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or after the chapter on cauteries, that I have divided from the beginning to the end, because you will find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The beginning full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	It is known that this disease often affects infants at birth, and when the neck of the child is held too tightly;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a cause that has not been remedied.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen have died;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and therefore it seems to me that I should avoid this work in these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child who was suffering from severe pain, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer bear it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and I thought that the swelling was so great that he died, and this swelling is assembled outside the bone above the shoulder, between the neck and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the work is such that if the swelling is between the neck and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you must make a wide incision into the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and it should be as long as we, until the swelling flows out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the space:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and you see the signs that you see the commissures of the head opened on each part, and the sharp pain that you feel when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then it is necessary that you cut into the head three incisions in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, drain all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After you strain the incisions with bandages and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave it so for five hours;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then you release it, and treat the wound with bandages and blisters, and leave the head strapped again, and give the patient to eat dry meat without moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incising is that you look for the size of the abscess and the sharpness of the needle;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it is never in front;
aucune fois derrier;	for it is never behind;
aucune fois en destre;	for it is never on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and it is never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Then cut where the abscess is open, and fill the needle with, and make the incision according to what you have the power to do;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be careful not to cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and if blood comes out, so that the hairs die from the detachment of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it comes to any disease that is called "cataract" on those or in the foot, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help much, then the treatment is to cauterize with what they cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you see that the joints are dislocated, it is necessary to make them return to their proper place.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	After that, rub the limb with a rough cloth until the arteries become visible, then hold the dislocated joint against the entire cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at where the blood flows, and if the veins on both sides of the ears are not restored, they are not yet fixed.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then sign the veins of the ear, then cut both sides with a sharp knife until the vein comes out from the bone, and it should be through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, pour out the sponge outside the artery and cover it above, cutting in the same way as it should be through the middle.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let it bleed continuously until it stops on its own.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then it is necessary to measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then drill into and through the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and put six drops of blood outside if it is necessary to do so, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on what the patient can bear, and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains above the bone point do not let any pus come out, then strain the wound and bind it, and the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	for the head of the shoulder
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	when the ancient head of the shoulder comes, and it is stuck due to the moisture of tears and chills in the temples and old age and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and nothing helps him, then we should cauterize the arteries of the temples and burn, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the manner of their extraction is such that the hairs of his temples face the bad ones, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not quickly restored in anyone who is too fat.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is restored, hold the neck with some cloths, then rub the limb with some rough cloth, and raise the limb in hot water until the artery opens clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spoon that is here:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then gently scrape the skin until you come to the artery, then pull it up with pincers, and remove it well from all parts of the cloth;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	If the artery is thin, then turn it back to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two needles.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not covered, it will not jump all at once.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And draw out a little blood from the vein, just enough to fill three small containers.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	If the artery is large, then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong silk thread, so that no blood comes before the healing of the wound, and so that it does not cause further bleeding.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cover the excess that is between the two knots with a small amount of ointment in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the cautery cutellaire is applied to the bone until the needles are covered.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And this is the work of death, when the pain is not accompanied by fever and it is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cautery is to finish the moistures:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For it is of greater help against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arrows that one fills the wound with old cotton and places on top well-made bandages;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when they are removed, if necessary apply dry remedies that cause blisters and bandages until they are healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if without cutting the artery as you work, then quickly cover it with cauterization, or fill the wound with vinegar and apply it to your hand that the uncut part is not stained.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this present, put it on the joint as much as the sinew should not be frozen, and raise the joint from high cold until the sinew ceaselessly, and it should be stretched as it should be.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and what is more movable and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to last longer in their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When instruments are too tight, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have slit the two veins, and you melt the hot iron over it until it comes just to the bone, and cop the vein in two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be separated by the two shoulder blades because it is not known how much of this cauterization affects the whole body.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the skin of the head, and it does not improve with medical treatment, and you see the face of the patient becoming twisted, and it feels like a tremor.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and they are held and moistened so much that the hairs of the papers are burned, and the papers are charred, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if it is necessary for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called the old "wound healer," and you should do this for the painful part that has this disease, whether it has hair or not, then make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	And either one of the cuts as two downwards from the forehead, and the others two along the ribs, above the ribs, and be careful not to incise the arteries that are above the ribs.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	And keep your hand away from the continuity of the two jaws, and let each wound have the quantity of three drops through the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and much of cloth to wipe away the blood, then boil the spatula in two parts of water that is this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is from the temple to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape all that is between the two cuts to the entire face which is above the bone, then make another part from the same incision to the other second, and then stretch forth this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you insert the instrument called "curette" into the first cut, it is very sharp on one side and dull on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side of the curette towards the eye and the dull side towards the bone, and continue scraping until it reaches the same cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And copper all the vessels that descend from the head as those which are so long as the incision is continued to what opens the face, and then make another part in the same cut to the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	then evenly extract the blood, and express the joint for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place a piece of old cloth in each wound, and put on dressings soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure that abscesses do not come.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and at the end of the day, release the joint, and apply a great amount of salt, then the healing poultice with red oil, and other remedies to heal wounds, until they are healthy.
dou reume des eulz	renewing of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When anyone comes for the usual cauterization, and you see the eyes tightly closed and small, and weakened vision, and burnt papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hairs prick, and where the hair meets the skin, it causes sharp pain, and the hairs are discharged.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	therefore, avoid these accidents that these matters and this cautery do not come from many veins, and the movement that is, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a deep cut into the forehead, and another one wide at the forehead.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	and begins at the cut of the right temple to the left temple, and let the incision just to the bone.
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that cause pain.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, soak up all the blood with a sponge, and then clean between the two lips of the cut and put wool, and test with linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then lay strips of cloth soaked in wine and oil above it, and guard against abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until charcoal begins to form, then treat with things that cause vomiting, like char.
En teil maniere:	In a similar manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of cologne earth, and make a poultice.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it in these wounds to cause vomiting throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear deafness
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that which enters our ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beasts, or stones from the mine or similar things like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it chiefs in the ear pebble or other kind of thing that does not fit well in the ear, does not grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see a stone, spill a little purple oil or sesame oil, then moisten the extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and the patient should spit out the condition, and stop up the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool around the ear.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times it comes from this treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	And if it does not come forth, apply gentle extraction with fine tweezers, of which this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	If not, apply gentle extraction with a fine needle;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	And if it does not come out with the needle, make a small hole in the rain and pour water into the top of the hole or the ear canal very strongly, and stop up the hole with melted wax so that nothing can enter with the needle.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then remove it properly, as it often comes out as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come out in some way, she takes glue from some means, and puts it on the wound, and places any instrument that is sharp to this purpose, and puts a little cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue over the stone or whatever, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if she does not do any of these things that we have said, then you must quickly cut the ear as soon as an abscess forms and pus comes out, and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the way of the cut is that you first make a small incision into the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its strength, then place the wound between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear where the grease or fat lies;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be as wide as a crescent moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck the poison into your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is small and swells up, administer extraction.
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then administer the following subtle method according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and administer an incision to that small one.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not crush it immediately if you think the grain is wet due to earwax, until you have made many pieces of it.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with small tweezers and the suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the acute case when it is in the ear, it is necessary that the hairs use blowing of a soft condition first, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the very ear itself where the sharp is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the sky, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, take many small, sharp needles according to the length of your hand, and heat them slightly in the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	And place the hairs one or a pinch of their ear, and go up to the other foot from its other part, and pierce with another needle through the ear which is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	And do not stop pricking with needle after needle until the sharp pain is all gone, and thus it will all go away.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	And if you see, take a reed, and boil one of the needles in the ear, and the other head take from the fire until the thinnest reed is hard.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Then repeat the process for other joints until the sharp pain is gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of an animal, if it is small like a mouse and similar, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	But if it is of large size that one can feel, then anesthetize extraction of pins.
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And the thing to remove that is in the ear is the least difficult.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and do not help much, then you should look at the ear in the sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are no open wounds, if they prick at their base with small needles, and if they do not open, then take the cannula of which this is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be tight below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And push the more slender needle into the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is successful throughout the cannula;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the blood flows out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to flow out, then apply pressure around the cannula of cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not succeed as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the opening of veins, and you will find them where to treat distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you drip your oils and medicines into the ear of this instrument, as you see here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And it should be made of silver or tin with small holes below and larger ones above to drip;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And to press within the distillation of the tin instrument well made for this purpose, and if you see take the razor and wrap it evenly with cotton around the tip;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines into the canal, and the canal should be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then press inside the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or gently from the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels the pain inside, and the distilled water should be slightly warmed over the fire as it is poured into the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and be careful that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be very good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear deafness
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born without any deformity in their ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	And the same thing happens to men due to the swelling of a wound or a foreign body inside the ear, and this swelling never occurs from within the ear, if one cannot see it.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	And the same thing never happens to the water outside of the ear, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Therefore, if one cannot see it, it is a severe illness in many positions, and in this one where one sees, one must put the ear of the bad hair to the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this span of time because of which here is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be smooth and thin in front and behind all plain, so that it does not blind the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is of bone or the ear canal, if your pinchers are thin and the coping lightly, until that bone is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wart is inside the ear, then take a fine razor and slightly warm it at the fire, then put it on the skin of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the inflammation that the hairs cause pain to hear, lightly puncture, and ensure that you do not injure the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then place a tent according to the width of the pustule in the ear, and insert it using the Egyptian method.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not do anything until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and insert it using acute rose, and powder above vitriol broken.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear swell, then it is advisable to remove the tent and insert another tent inserted using rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if there is a flow of blood, soak an sponge and wipe it with cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the flow of blood which are to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the charred papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is the method that comes on papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry, if it is necessary to extend them with forceps and pincers, and the lid of a spatula from their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Then put on the broken glass leg.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without de-corticating, then cauterize the subtle lens with the fine cauterizer, and the cauterizer after the incision is valuable;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and many times repair them, but nothing remains from their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often in papers come things that seem gravelly in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and is an assembly of large moisture above and below the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	The work is such as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	Take care if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is an easy thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Then make the wounds wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take them with tweezers and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you do not cover it without pricking the paper a little, it will not hurt the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	If the wound is large, it should be sutured with a stitch, and the care should continue until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If it is small, do not force it, for the wounds heal quickly and easily.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the grain is falling down into the inside of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and catch the grain with some tweezers, and cover it and press from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	And if the paper is separated by the incision, it does not matter.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And when the grain is removed, apply a solution of strong salt water, and care for the wound until it heals.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is soaked in threads of paper above, and it has more effect on children than adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they have diarrhea in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And because of this, they sleep on their faces down, and lie on their backs, and their papers are moist under their pillows that the grease enters and covers them with its appearance.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the limb to your ears and feel the cracking sound between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is such that the evils put their head in your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains the external parts of each part, then put it on top of him.
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the external parts are assembled inside the circle.
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then make in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a cut of a wide size, and it should not be any wider than the wound that is made at the vein opening.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin in front until you reach the external parts.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many positions come the external parts of the cut, in the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Extract the bandage from all over the piece of cloth between your two hands, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	And make sure you do not tuck it into the wound, that you do not bring the whole length of the bandage to the oil, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if it does not open at the beginning of the wound, slightly scratch the wound until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then extract it as we have said, then wipe the bandages in soft and sharp, and put on the limb, and spread out evenly.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who breathe and place on to corrupt the moisture that is remaining.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then, let the healer as long as they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the healer comes to the abscess, let them apply wet dressings until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hairs are artificially placed or arranged other than their natural way, and are awakened, they can harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as tears accustomed to and softening of the papers and cornea, until this is caused by the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four ways of treatment:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cauterization with fire together, or by medicine as the case may be, according to what is before or in the chapter of cauterization, and it is done either by incision and stitching, or by caines, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary for you to place the head of the hairs in your hand, then return the paper of the oil to your right hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	If she is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then prick with a needle at the top of each thread;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be either on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows above these hairs, and pull the thread up from under the paper, and turn the blade to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs, and smooth out the skin, from the large arm to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then pull the thread, and place outside the paper a small cotton and linen tent, then above the paper, a figure of a wheel, like the fuller's wheel, and all the while it should be according to the quantity that you saw raise the paper which is divided into each one.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if for a person who has skill, one should copiously apply a great quantity of paper according to how the paper is softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then make all the space above the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large calf to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cuts be near the hairs naturally in the large root, then bury the needle in one of the two angles of the curve, then scrape the whole;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then gather the two lips to one stitch of a needle with all the thread of fine linen, and suck the blood, and remove the excess hairs above the two edges at any things glued, if you see this being done.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then do not worry about it, leave the stitches and threads in place for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then heal the wound from the side of the stitches with dry and constricting substances, because the paper swells at the moment of the wound and brings together the parts, but the stitches are dissolved (as the ancients said), and this is without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and you should shape the paper into a form that is like the fleece of wool, as we have described, and cut it into three pieces according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then copper which surmounts as small equal forces according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or one with a thread, and bring it into the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and put another thread over the large arm, and the second thread over the small one, and bring the threads together evenly between your two fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift the skin over where you have sewn, as we have said, then gather the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar soothing substances.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never has it happened that the hairs of the paper are converted.
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you should use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you should convert the paper and make the incision inside as I have said, then make two wounds by art, and two ligatures as thin as the paper and the width of the space is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie them as the two threads of which you hold the thread;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then bring them together thinly above the paper of the oil, and strain the two wounds from the two parts formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and it leaves it thus for several days, and the skin that is stretched will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off from it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, if the copper has some strength, then cure it until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is soaked, and if it is raised with paper, and they will not grow back.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the shape of the two needles that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you grasp a thin needle, and pull the silk thread soft and thin;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then gently gather the shoulder blades and bend them slightly, and let the arms hang down by their own length, a span long.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then order the other arm to be raised quickly and slightly, and bend the shoulder blades of the other arm.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then put the misaligned joints in their proper place.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let the work be done in the shade so that the work is not too difficult, for it is a delicate and small task, then push the needle through the entire arm at the base of the hair, and pierce it gently into the paper until you draw it out above the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then remove the hair up to the skin, and cut off the hair that is in the skin, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then remove your hand until the hairs come out of all the skin in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the skin is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then treat the skin with the discharge until it comes out completely and you can see through the oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then treat the skin and the thread, and close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and grows on top.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	If the hairs are short, accompany them with long hairs from goats, and lift them with that which you leave, until they are lengthened and then let it go.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the stirring of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the pimples, comes in the oil, there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it comes by wounding, or cutting, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of the work in it is that you break that sewage, and dehydrate the lips from it, and put inside tents of linen, and hold it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you should only use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	If you do this, the disease returns worse than the first;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but I work with things that soften, like fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the rose of sharp or high and seed of linen be cooked, and stinging nettle boiled in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and the cure for this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasures of your cure are that you take care not to let it spoil according to the form it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said are only to bring it back to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the ear
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	And the method of the work is such that you hold a needle with a double thread, and the thread in the shuttle, and make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out on both sides.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then the shuttle is above all the needle, and the copes at the span width.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if it appears like paper according to what is necessary, it is good.
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If not, take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or where it costs inside the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	et soient les chiés des deux fendures des deux angles de l'incision que tu as copeit, et fais des angles si que lorsque elles sont assemblées, que le figure soit ausi com le figure d'une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is of, from what teaches the paper, then add the two parts severed, and the cut of a thread of linen;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the care that we have said about the softening medicines and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a plain cut outside of the hairs of the paper, and according to what is above;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	And one should perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the wise masters compare all possible means to how they can make the figure return to its natural shape.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And the misaligned joints themselves, according to what is necessary for operation and instruments in many positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	and of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this sewing is done by hand in a somewhat manner that the paper above is glued with the white of an egg, and cannot move or do its natural workings, then it is necessary that you bring the point of a razor outside the paper, and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and it is set with pins, until you copy what is on the needle's subtle edge, which should not be too sharp or too blunt, so that the pain does not suffer from the needle being too sharp or too dull.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healed completely, and never in the sharp salt oil, and lift it with the gentle sweet, and of vinegar.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and oil a linen cloth, and place above the oil wool moistened with plenty of honey.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day, use a cold compress and unclean things until they are healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow joint of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	There are two ways to do it:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	It is either nervous and similar to the hard sphacelus, or it is not nervous but similar to a white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cut with knives, does not move.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Both start from the great arm and grow slowly until they cover the entire eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incision is that the evil ones put their head in your healthy place, then they work the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and gently hold the paper to your hand, then bend the angle with small forceps, and extend it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put horsehair, or goat hair, or beef hair, and thread it tightly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the angle, and push the needle through the entire angle, and tie the angle with a thread and extend it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the angle that faces the prickle and silk to the skin at the top, then cut the remaining in the root of the arm at every subtle hair and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or the arm, so that by the incision it does not usually bleed;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and never has the joint remained out of place alone, and over time, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the skin is removed to reveal all the soft tissue that gives it its shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And beware that the soft tissue does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the bone is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision pour in a little broken silk oil, and a poultice made of litharge, and let it rest on the other side;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the care that is needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the joint is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the incisions cannot enter, often this remedy of joints is cured by medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grow like I have described in the previous section, and if you see it covered, work with the oil of the hairs, and take the sharp needle lightly as follows:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	and gently scrape the edge above, and if you see that it does not soften and the razor is sharp, then drip from your mouth into the oil of the candle made of litargire and the red wax and silk thread, and stir the oil just after;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely open.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, such as an abscess, then milk it, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	and if the appearance of the flesh of the arm appears in the oil by great harm, then remove it at once, and take a part and not all at once, so that tears do not come to it;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then apply a red wine oil infusion made of litargire.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men are born with no red hair, and cover the prunelle and hold it above the papers and turn them to the defuer, and it seems like a baldust rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	And the work is such that the hairs put their head in your clean, then they do the eyes, and with all that red hair, it is convenient for this, and support it at the force.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	Then cover the first hair, and go all scraping to the razor just at the end, and make sure you do not smear the oil at the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be made with the space-like method that we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and with small forces to remove the base, as it forms after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is made and all the char is removed, use the oil of silk that you distill or red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on top of the oil with cotton wool, so that it is ensured to be a healthy wound.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains and the sinus is overhanging, and you doubt an abscess is forming, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming remedies for a healthy wound.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make the same charms cast into oil by this similarity.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you add the cure of each weak oil from its natural source;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in ironwork;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these workings until you see that this limb is suffering from that working.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	which are red veins that cover over the eye, and take away its work and weaken the eye always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	The work is therefore to the first that you look at this oil, in which previously was, and outside, and there is no other disease besides the previous one;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then the joint should be bent in a certain way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to put his head in your healthy hand, then bend those vertebrae along the spine according to their wisdom, and let the vertebrae be slightly doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be done twice a degree in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then bend those vertebrae gently, and squeeze the blood out of them hour after hour, until you can remove those vertebrae from the joint;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to bleed the joint with sharp points of the spatula, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not cut those vertebrae;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	And when you have done this, if you distill green and red oil of turpentine to corrupt the humor that remains above.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you cannot collect all the humor in that hour, then make a poultice on the oil of things calming the pain of the eyes, and let it stay for some time until the pain is eased and the abscess is securely healed, then continue according to this method until they are healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The master calls it "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it by cauterization and with medicine boiling according to the humor that I have before said, and it is not healed, then engage in what you did above the abscess, where it should rot, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is discovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the tooth is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, if the forceps of all the instruments used here are in its form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "rough file," and it should be made of iron from the same as the tooth, and it should be pointed as a needle, as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put it on the surface of the rotten tooth, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do not do it again, then restore the tooth with drying remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the joint is reset and the limb is straight, and the body of the bow is straight, it remains thus for forty days, and it does not recur and is not postponed, and no bad accident happens to it, so it is considered healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, there is no other means than to return the fistula to its proper position according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	And you must dislocate the bone the second time with iron and with medicines, and when it is discovered, take the fork according to this form, and the nail should be bent at three angles, and the fistula should be attenuated from the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	Then place it on top of the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil and pores, then turn to the full extent of the forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain as it comes in that position if he holds his hand above his shoulder.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	And then restore the joint of dry medicines as I have indicated, and when the char is born and hardens the limbs, it goes to the shoulder.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are wide open all at once, and it does not come to dislocate at the shoulder, nor is it discomforting, then you must bind the pain.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the healthy one, then it places leeches or hatchets to draw blood, then it applies oil mixed with acid, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strains the oil, and applies the ointment with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the way of the cloths is that you press cloths that are enough soft, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity they have to do;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it through a cloth that is strong and firm, and then restart the leeches to draw blood;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suction cups and let the oil remain on it day and night, and if the joints are dislocated, it is necessary to strongly restrain them.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the joint after the day and night, and if you see the oil return, it is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then restart the plaster and bandages and the joint and the suction cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	For the tearing of a vein, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When dislocations occur in the woven cloth, then open it, and come forth with papers like the grain of resin, and is expansible to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see the joint, the work is such that you should poke a needle into the root of the part below this one above, then poke another needle where the tendon of the elbow is double.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and let the first needle follow its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cover the arm with a piece of cloth and tie it tightly, then pull out the needle and put oil on the wound in abundance.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and let it stay until the child's wound heals with the cloth, then care for the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and never a wound is restrained by the use of each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if they appear very large, then pierce the thin spatula that comes from the oil, and wipe away the yellowish moisture and clean the hairs, and enter immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from under the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than boils that are gathered in the oil, resembling sharp droplets, and it is not sharp.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is such that you make the dislocated joint sit properly on its seat and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bone coming above to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be released, and do not descend and be disassembled the light, and see the dislocated things as they should be;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend, then it is acute, and do not straighten the bone as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	then make the dislocated joint between your hands, then take the thin spatula and put it under the eye lid from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the eyelid and the eyebrow, until the bone is;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	et when she was born, if she is distilled in hot vinegar mixed with honey, or hot or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then she is cured of other cures until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oils of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have similarities in the divisions, and what is needed to pierce it.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if in work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the pain between your crossed hands sit, outside of the light for the sun, and the oil is clean and tightened very tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the paper of the oil to your right hand if the eyes are on the right, or to your left hand if the eyes are on the left.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the tool called «almagda», or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then place the tip of the tool above the crown by the thickness of a pen in the part of the oil that is called «almagda», then strike the tool called «almagda» firmly, and withdraw your hand until it pierces into the part of the oil, and feel that «almagda» is empty;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the measure of the opening «almagda» be at the length of the space from the nail to the end of the finger.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, then put the instrument just above it where it is sharp, and press out the blood one after another through a hole.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he is now sharp, then he sees the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After a short rest, and if the sharpness returns the second time, put the force with the instrument, and when it is stuck and does not rise, gently twist around your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put a small silk thread, and leave the oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply a warm compress or wet cloth soaked in rose oil and plenty of honey, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	And those who are from our time, apply it with plenty of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people who have very hard eyes, then you must use the tool called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce only the connective tissue, and do not go too far in front, but make the sharp instrument, then press gently, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work appears the evil of sleepiness that happens, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and it should be done with all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and it should be tied according to its position just above the eye;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then reset the dislocation in that same dark place, and prove his sight, and let him see some things, and then return the bone to its position just before sleep;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it should not be done only in the morning or after the incision, but it should be done when the pain is at its peak.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	when abscesses come, then you should apply oil in front of the seventh hour, and it will alleviate the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is calmed, then remove the bandage and put on its face a gold coin to cover any light, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then slowly go out of the house and return to his own home;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and tell that no one should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And some came to us who were of the Yrach, who told us that in their country people used to do something like this, because of which the arrowhead would stick, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I read it in any books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the similar forms of the almond, because those who do not know them see it as such;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and they are truly made of rain:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And they are the masters of this very subtlety, and the others in three angles awake.
de la char sor le neis	of the sinus headache
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Never do charred or burned arrows of various kinds appear, because there are some that seem like scorpions at the tip;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such with enhanced burnt color, and if the arrow has a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case of those arrows that are good and not enhanced, it is appropriate to make the pain between your hands against the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and work his nostrils, and pour the liquid into those charms, and pull them out;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	so that you can hold it in your hand at the subtle tip of a needle, until you know that that char is entirely hardened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains nothing that can be held, open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without harming yourself, an abscess bursts, then let the pus drain as it should.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if they are malignant abscesses, then quickly and cauterize it until the wound is not moist and all the charms are removed, then pour in clean, cool water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	When the shoulder is injured, and moisture comes to the palm, remove it so that it is healthy.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, remove it because there is cartilage above the bone, so that the tools do not come out for cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	Therefore, it is necessary that you insert a thread of linen slightly thick, and soak it in our hands, and put space between each one as much or little as needed.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	And put the hairs of the injured person in the thread of the needle at the top, and pull through as far as it comes out of the needle through the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	And often they do this to children in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who wish to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the child's head with one hand, and the other child's head with the other hand, and alternate them back and forth as we have shown in the picture.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you feel that the teeth have not been corrupted by that charm, then draw out the child's tooth, suck the blood, and wipe the wound with an Egyptian egg, and return it to its place as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Do this three times or more, until the wound has eaten away everything that remains of the charm.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then place or remove a bandage as needed for several days until it is healed, and if there is a need for medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the shape of the instrument for purging the head, with which one distills oils and medicines that are applied.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be of silver or tin, shaped like an open lamp, like a tube, and the conductor is also like this.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, then make a closed tube, and the instrument is polished to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and it should have a handle at the top to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the sinus headache
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease is born at the head of the neck, which is called "tulum", and grows and becomes large in size, as it appears to be seen.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason, you should cover it at the beginning, and the bone is all bruised, then put the fire cauterizer or hot medicine on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	And if you delay in covering it for so long, if it is hard, of poor color, and without feeling, then take heed.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If you do not touch it with a little iron because it is an infected abscess, for when it is covered once, then great harm comes to the pain.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if they are abscesses, gently touch them, not with burning hot, and you see that one can cover the whole, if the pain and fear allow, and cure the limb of things that are tight and restrictive.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the bone is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	However, when the solution comes in one of these cartilaginous places, it is of little use, as it is not beneficial to everyone.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary to wait until the wound has no blood, if you look and see that the wound is fresh and full of blood throughout.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply both lips to a seam, then cure it until it is healed.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already decayed from one side and the other, then it is necessary to scrape all the parts of their edge until they heal, then assemble both lips to a seam, and hold them together, and powder with powder of blood of dragon, and broken incense.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply powders on top of the plaster of strong or other healing plaster, and leave it until it heals through it, then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In some people, there are abscesses inside the lips, similar to grains, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each one, and take them with forceps and clean each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	Then apply the limb after the incision of broken glass, until the wound is cleansed.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then apply a dry bandage to the limb and treat it with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the crown of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often gums rise above the teeth, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If necessary, hold it with pliers and cut at its root, and let the blood or pus flow out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then apply the limb broken glass, or other astringent and desiccating powders.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	And if that swells again after the incision, and often does, then cut it the second time and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return slightly after the burn;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of instruments to cover.
des sordens	of the deaf
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes they are gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scraps that are unpleasant and sharp;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes they are associated with black and yellow and green teeth, as far as the corruption reaches the gum, and are with foul-smelling teeth;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if it is necessary for you to remove the pain between your hands, and its roots are in your holy place, and remove the teeth or scraps that appear, as long as nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	And thus make of the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are removed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	And if it is taken out what is at the first layer, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	If not, start again from the second layer and the third, until you have removed everything.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	And wash the teeth with various instruments to remove, according to what the operator demonstrates, because the razor that is used to remove the teeth has other shapes than the one used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	And these forms and others be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	When you are treating a tooth for pain that you delay pulling as much as you can, because no one should do this.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a very high substance from which we have no excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the toothache is extremely painful, you should be certain that the tooth is dead.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain of the misaligned tooth, and take care that it is either a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	And in any way do not leave the pain because of it, until the bad ones are removed, for we have already done this to these sinners.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	And when you are well certain of the painful tooth, it is necessary that you burn around the tooth on all sides. with a strong iron rod to protect the gum from all parts.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move the joint gently with your fingers or thin needles at the first point and point, until it is well dislocated, then firmly fix the needles.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and either the painful part between your knees and ankles, and keep it still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take one of these tools and push it gently into each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if the dense part is punctured and damaged, then it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pores are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if the thin needles are firmly held, so that they do not break when being pulled out.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to carefully wrap around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part, and again cause the pain by the evil of the root more great pains of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And beware that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant sainors, who by their haste and boldness break everything at once, and never amend what we have told.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring forth every time by the wise one of this great disease because of the roots that they delay, or for the cart that they break, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the mouth with wine or sage and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if blood comes out and often does, then use the mouth with broken glass wine;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if it does not heal, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of instruments used to remove teeth should be long and thick-handled, so they do not double over when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	These are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick-bodied so they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of well-made iron, and they should be pointed to hold the tooth.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary to place a moistened cotton ball on the tooth for I or II hours until the tooth is softened, then extract the forceps called "algefri," which are shaped like a beak.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and they should be made inside as well as a lime and that is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out at all these needles, it is necessary that you dig around the root completely, and put the tool called "althali", which is a spoon-shaped instrument, in order to:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And if it is large, so that it does not break, and if its root springs up through the sky, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, with all the instruments, from which the forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this tool that has two prongs, with which comes the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the realm of the teeth, and with this tool that looks like large needles, from which comes the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let these instruments be such that they cannot break, and they are many of dense ones.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to their works and the disease shows them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach the instrument for the diversity of the others and it has not broken the cart or other bones, or it has not helped, if he searches for the instruments that he needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which these forms come:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let there be thick and strong bands to hold the bone, that it not escape, but be able to hold and remove.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	Then restore the limb to its proper position with suitable medicines, and if there is any pus in the bone, and it is small, then remove all of this tool:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not in accordance with its natural position, and its form is ugly, and especially in young women, then it is necessary to remove the tooth if it is not in the right place, and cannot be straightened or cleaned.
adonques lou raie;	Then the root:
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if he is held by the tooth, take this instrument which has the following form, and it is similar to a small beak, and let it be made of iron, sharp at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the copper bit by bit in your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be removed, then the copper bit by bit like this is the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the lip of which one makes arrows;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and in the lip of the tooth, lightly and carefully, so that it does not move until it is cut;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the flat end of it to any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then one must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they are missing
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth is knocked out, whether by impact or falling, and the pain cannot be relieved by pressing on the gum where it was located, and you treat it with restricting remedies, and it does not help.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if they need to be restricted with a gold wire, because the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and it should be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see that the teeth are moving, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the injured tooth between the other teeth, as many as there are, until you can safely chew on the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	Then, reapply the covering just to the part where you began, and gently and skillfully stretch your hand, until it does not move at all.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	And let your fingers be tied to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the roots of the teeth with some needles, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy tooth, and place it in such a way that it does not bleed on the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	Then leave it so tight as it can stay, and if it dislocates, or the thread breaks, then tighten it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it persists and serves in this manner for the entire duration, it is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the second molars, and the second incisors, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth breaks, if it is reset in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And it does not interfere with any other teeth that are wise and painful, and never is the shape of a goat's bone made, and it is reset in the place where the defect is, and it is held as we have said, and it persists and serves for the entire duration.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never are these joints that come out of their place from the tongue or naturally, which one is born thus.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a burned wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the works are such that you work the mouth of the dislocated joint, and have their head in your safe place, and they lift the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then press the nerve with a wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if it has hardness or no, and it is by burned wound, then beat the thin one and press the wide one gently;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the cut is not too deep, for the artery that is out;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	When you have done this, lift the limb of high rose or ash, or high cold, then place a tent of linen over the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and apply the tent to the hairs every night, so that the limbs cannot move.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if blood flows out, put a piece of broken glass on the limb;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the blood does not stop flowing, then cauterize it with the slow-burning cautery, which is good for healing.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then use other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see that the wound is yellow or black or hard, and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, because it is a chancre.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	If it is leaning towards the wound, and there is moisture, then pour the needle, and the opening of a thin spatula, and deliver from one side and the other.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	And if it does not want to enter your work, then place the broken glass shards on top as long as it is cleaned, then return to your work until you remove all the foreign matter.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then lift the limb from above and below, and treat other wounds until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No one ever comes from within the throat wounds that are called "godath", and they are properly called the II mandibles, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If abscesses are hard to feel with a small sense and of fuzzy color, then do not touch them with a little iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch them with a little iron, also for the running of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	But let it be until it is ripe, and then you will break it, or it will break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of white color and the root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess has settled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then let the pain sit in front of the sun, and its heads be in your healthy hand, and the work the mouth and the arrow that the soldiers have between their hands, and press the tongue away from all the instrument, because of which is the shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or thin brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	if you press the tongue with this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the point and chip it in the amber, and draw it out above as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and take nothing with from the threads, then cover the instrument with a cloth, of which this is the shape, which seems like forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all the heads are hooked, one on top of the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, with a hook, of which this is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	and let it be cutting on one side, and on the other not;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	When you have cut one of the splints, cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the sharp pain with hot, hot, and salty water, and if there is blood flowing, gargle the sharp pain with hot water, or use pounded green pomegranate skins, or similar things, until the wound is cleansed.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it until it is healed.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And never any other abscesses than the two splints are born in the throat, so cut them then as the two splints should be.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged within her throat, specifically a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the condition that was choking her, and could not eat or drink, and died if she continued like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had been inserted with two needles through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I therefore acted quickly, and inserted it into one incision, then removed the rest, and removed a large portion of blood.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	Then I inserted it into another incision through the throat, and performed the operation on the mouth and pressed her tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	After I had extracted these abscesses, and I took out a part of it, and it did not stop bleeding until a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	And thus the woman's throat was cut, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess by a long stretch.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	And the abscesses kept recurring, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	Therefore, I advised her to cauterize it internally in the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	Thus, she did not grow without it.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I departed from these parts, and knew not what God would do after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When referring to the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if it is large and round, it is called "uvula".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the abscess has been relieved, and it is small, then you must lance it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	And the one that is round and not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of a dark or black color, then you must avoid the incision of the latter.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	Because there is great danger in the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its size and length, you should place the pain in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the tool that we have mentioned earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then fish the thorn out of the wound, and remove it, and wrap it with one or two of the tools that I have mentioned in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you cover only the excess that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the second rib, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is too great for the copper, then you must use an engine for the cauterization of the sensitive pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cauterization is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And if the hairs put their head in your clean hand, and then press the tongue against the instrument we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and fix it with a sharp, live knife, so that it is not too thick or too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use the movement of this instrument, which has this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And it should have one hair or how the man puts the medicine, like the movement of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the hairs lie across his chest, so that saliva and muscle juice from his mouth flow into the medicine inside, so it does not drip down his throat and into his stomach.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it on the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see the medicine is softened and the bitter taste of the medicine is eased.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through all the cotton into the corner above, until the cotton becomes red on the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	And do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wait for several hours or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you have the skill to restart the cauterization of the eye, then restart it, and after the cauterization, wrap it around the eye with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the eye.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And either apply a cold sharp instrument, and treat with gargling until they are healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is more saved from incision than from the cauterization;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and hyssop and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in one pot, and add vinegar, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	And the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and inside the pot there should be an instrument like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And it should be of silver or tin, and one end of the instrument should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the brain through the nose, until the brain is dead.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	After that, it is often repeated until the brain dries, and make sure you do not apply this at the beginning of the onset of the abscess, for many things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And do not apply it until the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a knife and place it inside the head, so that the mouth does not close too much.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the knife does not cause excessive vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with saving life.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it is asserted at the throat with an object or fish bone, or nothing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you remove what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun at all times, so that you see the thing;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what you cannot see and is pushed back into the throat, it is necessary that you make vomit the thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	If by chance, the thing is also moved by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the hairs have swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or some piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and it has tied the thread to the sponge, and then swallowed it again;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when she comes to the shoulder, she will be caught, and then drawn out forcefully;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if she does not come out as we have said, take the instrument of force according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come out, or push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and move the hairs and push the instrument, because it is more or less or the thing is as such;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the pushing goes down, or it pulls the instrument evenly, as far as it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat wound
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Never use the saliva, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when it does not profit, then look in the throat of the hairs to the sun, then you press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sandal, take it to all the small nails, or with thin needles that are worth for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, take a hairy rope, and push it into the throat of the misaligned joint, then push or move the rope with the sharp iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the misaligned joint is stiff all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take full handfuls of sharp, cold iron, and work the mouth, and pour in water against swallowing, and move it frequently to your hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if the tongue soon feels the sharpness, it will spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	and if it does not spit as we have said, then smoke the bad breath with asafetida, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will eventually stop.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	and the way of the fumigation is that you hold the pot with charcoal inside, and place it in a covered dish, and in the middle of it put the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then give your steam, and the painful one puts the head of the snake in its mouth, and closes its mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes up to the nose.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the nose will now drip, and if it does not drip, then repeat the steam many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and suffer the painful one thirst, and give it salty and sour things, and do not let it drink anything sharp.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will have the task of being cured by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the nose, so is, when one can see it, similar to curved needles for mucous membranes to enter into the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles the beak of a bird, and there is an abrasiveness to the lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot wear out.
et vez ci la forme:	and it has this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many types of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes with after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncture and cut.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways that one is in its very appearance, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for the bones or when they are broken.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the thigh bone are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if to abscesses there is one that should not be punctured, until the hole is completed according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses which are beyond the joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is swollen around, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which this is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is beyond the main member, and if you delay the piercing until it dies, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	When it is beyond the foundation, if you pierce it while it is dead, it will harm it.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	And it is necessary that you pierce the abscess when it is ripe for digestion completed, rather than that which is beyond the foundation, so that it does not putrefy and be long inside, and a fistula will come.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	and it is recommended that you scrape the head of the abscess perforation according to its completion, and this is when the pain is eased, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and swelling, and the decrease in debatement and relief of the main symptoms of the abscess, and the others.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is recommended that you make the perforation sit lower than the abscess, and where it opens more widely.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the perforation should be long and straight, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all these places evenly without any bleeding.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the position of that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the chest, it is better to leave the incision until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before heaven, then the blood of the vein flows along with it, and it is full of much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	And perhaps they harden the lips and pierce through them.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the arm, according to what the limb has need of.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you apply small abscesses, small holes.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	And in large abscesses, large holes, and many cuts according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	And if there are such abscesses or it is necessary to cover and protect them.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	When it has become just like the cloth, and is softened, then you should do as one does with rags.
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are some that are cut into three angles, and if there are some that are treated as the back of a mullet, as in abscesses;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, as in superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you puncture clearly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and when the abscess is large, and it has much pus, and you puncture, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then flatten the abscess just after, then draw out nothing else immediately;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	Repeat the procedure for many times until the bowels are completely empty.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Even if the patient has weak vitality, is pregnant, or a small child, or an elderly person with decrepit bones.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced never treats the wound once with the outflow of the pus, because by chance the abscess may die, and you will not be harmed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, dress the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a large opening, apply bandages of linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if there are large abscesses and much pus, it is necessary that you place a bandage in each one so that they come together against each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have pierced a part of the skin in an abscess, and you have wrapped it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or shredded linen against moisture, and bind it to the wound with a bandage.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the ointment for the wound until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is blood when working on your task, apply sharp cold and wet, and clean the instrument, and place it on the dislocated joint multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	and if the bleeding persists, and is not stopped by government and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book are not effective, and if it is very painful, then it is recommended to apply leeches and damp cloths soaked in wine and oil.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	If it is in this state, and the joint is charred, then you must apply warm cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, or in wine and oil heated, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then drain the abscess and dress it, and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	as I have told you how to proceed before treating abscesses, and see the chapter.
des soros	des soros
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the head, and there are ways of them that are in cloths, like the lance of a swallow, and many there are.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some and such as have moisture like chickens;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	And for those who are hard and rough to cut, there is no doubt if the artery is not cut against.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the cut is such that you prove with all the tool called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after, what thing it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	If it contains moisture, then it makes it from above downwards long.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off without leaving any hair that contains that moisture, for it will return if left alone.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then soak cotton in Egyptian oil, if present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, use vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it there until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And cover it with a clean cloth that remains at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the dressing, until you are sure it will not remain at night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound of inflammation according to what is suitable, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess remains large, then cut it according to this form, long.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	And pour your salves and the scar tissue from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it is located.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the artery makes it difficult, then do what I told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And so do with the abscess if it is piercing, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting into the piercing abscess and the moist, it is lighter, for they are of little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if any of these abscesses or wounds do not have moisture, and are from the type of old woman that I copied or wrote about;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, which could not be broken.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if they had made any incision, it would have been just as bad as a stone wound.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or near, it was because those who come to the head of children and roots of ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, so that the pus can come out.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there are abscesses at the neck, and they are removed with forceps, and then they are opened, and sometimes they come from other parts of the body or chest, and they are large, and they are joined together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofulous swelling is properly within its side, like the neck and abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and similar scrofula are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some things that contain moisture, and if there are evil ones who do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one you see of good disposition to the touch, and similar in color to the flesh, and moves from every part and is not attached to the bone or the artery or the vessel, and is not deeply rooted;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is necessary to remove it from above, and scrape every part, and place the two lips of the wound together as one, if you have skill, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and pull it out slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and is not too thin or too sharp, so that the hand does not slip, and do not expose it too soon, until you have covered what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not stop bleeding, pour vitriol broth or some powders that stop blood flow into the wound, and apply pressure.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and let it bleed until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is soothed, and then begin to bind it.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the wound is cleansed, return to your work until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	Then check if there are any remaining small pus pockets, and cut them out and drain them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the base of the abscess, it is not recommended that you cut that abscess at its base, but tie it with a strong doubled thread, and let it drop through, without causing harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	Then apply a wound of old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have completely removed the scab, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then as there is no excess due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	and you should cover the root of it with a bandage and pull out the thorn, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those abscesses that hold excess fluid, pierce where it opens and dies;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	And pierce it in such a way as the one previously mentioned, depending, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the wound is well bandaged, the treatment with healing ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	of the dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients said and spoke of the throat cutter;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and it is their written account of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have hernias, the neck's part called "epiglottis" must be avoided.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and it cannot be helped by this, because all the veins and the root of the evil are in those who have abscesses full in the mouth, or in the throat or in the armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it outside three circles or four a small cut across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut of the throat, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those who are not accustomed to the section of the epiglottis, as there is no cartilage, and the valves are long and narrow.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is cowardly, then it is necessary to stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And avoid the blood vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the sinew, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	And it is demonstrated by the section of the flap of the windpipe that jumps out through the limb that is broken, and by the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour is passed for which we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound carefully, and stitch it all together without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that cause heat to rise until they are healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says that one should not do this unless the throat is completely stunned, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect is paralyzed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, one must cover the epiglottis because the hairs cannot keep it in place, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and because the ancients ordered to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four, and then they ordered to stitch the wound and heal, as long as it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young lady take a knife and stab herself in the throat, cutting part of her jugular vein.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled much from the vein except for the throat, and the blood flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed the wound, and healed it until she was well.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there was nothing left to the young lady but that she was hoarse, and returned to her usual state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the throat there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large abscess in the color of pus, and is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and there are two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or natural, without cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And accidental is in two ways, one of which is similar to our gout, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from us through the artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not require to be treated with fire except in the small one, and the proof and search are made throughout the whole body:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you treat it as you would gout, and cannot find any vein, if the copper, as we do for ours, and bring it to all its clothing, if there is none.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search for it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many methods we have, of which I will say all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is fitting that I tell you all the differences between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that they are hot and feverish, until the boils have passed, and is accomplished by the pustulation;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	therefore the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With us there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains the abscess, which is its own pus and is according to the color of the skin, and begins like a small sore, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	And there are two kinds, dry or moist, and many colors, as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when coming to the care of a new patient, to first test and inquire about the "entromissoire" instrument, according to its form as it appears in the following chapter or book.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method for examining abscesses of ours is that you grasp or slightly moistened cloth that you insert into the abscess, and turn your fingers gently, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the core, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the contents, and be careful that it does not spray.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the running wound is moist, of whatever color it has, make it as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if afterwards the joint becomes moist, take away the grease, then cut it in a cross shape, and take pincers, and lightly scrape off every part and wash the coat or where it was with clean water;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot remove it cleanly, then tear it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it remains for a little while and does not bother you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and strain the wound, and put on things that calm abscesses, and treat other cures until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, use two fingers of the wound, and treat the wound with charcoal.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if it is against or other if you hasten and fill the wound with broken glass, and leave it for two hours or three, until the wound heals, and rest the discharge of blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the copper that is left out of the water.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See the shapes of the instruments inserted, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three kinds of quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	great, medium, and small, to search for the abscesses of fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are also like the needles used to extract them, and are of gold, or iron, or silver, and cost as much as those that are yellow, and are more experienced at removing black pus from fistula boils.
et sont de III manieres:	And there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	great, medium, and small, according to the amount of the size of the fistulas.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of needles are of many similarities, such as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	great, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	And if there are bones with two crowns of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	And if there are bones with three crowns, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	And if there are bones with two crowns, and bones of one crown only, and they are also of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The main ones of which they are made are cutting, and there are some that do not cut much more than one part, from which we peel the flesh, because otherwise they would cut the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And among these intermediaries are the awls inserted into handles, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	There are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we only use them in the joints, such as knees, arms, shoulders, and similar joints.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never made another small instrument like the scrapers of pustules, according to this form, with which we drain blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never placed back into its proper position which can cope with veins, and arteries, and it always returns according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, until they seem like the breasts of a woman.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain swollen and infected, and whoever wants to heal them, if it is necessary according to this form of this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with healing ointment, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	And if the wound is large and widespread, like those seen in women, then make incisions in two places above, similar to tears.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	To hold the one to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and follow what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in care until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	If it is not well-healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the hairs do not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in a caustic ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Let it remain until it melts the remaining and the grease, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the ankles
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the ankles are ways of hard scrofula or when there are pustules, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for the wound with a poultice until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then cut them as we have said in incisions of scrofula, and if the wound does not heal, then cauterize it as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the tearing of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin above it is dry, often abscesses form, and just as often there is bleeding from the vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	And if one knows how to do it, then one should treat the abscesses long and wide apart.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you sense pain, if you sense tightness.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and if it is for the vein, then look for nearby appearances.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	It is foolish to cover this abscess, and immediately when it is outside the arms and legs and neck and many other parts, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, the treatment of iron is necessary, and the one at the top should also be covered, and in the one that is inflamed by an artery piercing through the long skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then make a cut in the belly with needles, and then remove the artery of the webs, until it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then push out the other arrow, and pierce it through to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread of linen, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then do not remove the limb that is between the two ligaments of an intromission until the pus that is in it has been drained.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then administer the care that was prescribed, until the wound heals.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat this inflammation that comes from it, until it is cured.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is in the belly, it is necessary that you clean your hand with what you can from the abscess on all the skin, then pull out the needle outside of the body that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and if there is a double thread, so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or with one of two threads from the two ends of the thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then bring another needle to the end of all the thread outside of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four knots;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then drain the abscess until the excess pus is removed, then clean the wound and leave what is connected.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat the wounds with bandages and ointments until they are healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come to the artery and vein, abscesses also come to the neck when it is cut, or from too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And there are often complications and doubts in all cases where there are joints, and this is the most common abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in many positions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when it is squeezed, the patient feels great pain, and it is not in front of the flesh, but outside the wound.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and moves well from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor dislocate or displace, and that which is in the joints should not be covered by iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance I may have contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is at the neck or face, makes the skin soft:
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if it has pus, and it is in its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then suspend it at the tip, and scrape, then remove the bone, and stitch the wound together at the seam, and the treatment until it is healed:
des grosses boces pendans	large jaws hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No time ever occurs in the belly and no other place, and it is a disease called "funge" by the resemblance of snakes, and it is to the fine roots, and the large joints;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and in it are small and very large;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw the man who had two bellies which were more like snakes than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and they were torn, and in them flowed moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I took them and found in one eighteen ounces heavy, and in the other six ounces, and the workings in the incision are such that you look to see if the snakes are moist, and the color of the artifact is white and moist and of fine roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If the copper is too wide at the tip, and the fire cauterizer is present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting, there often come great bleeding of blood, and if you do not stop it, then hurry to use the cauterizer.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the pain spreading and causing fear of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread, and tie it around the limb as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	And then restrain, and do not cease to tighten the thread around the limb until it copes with the limb, and work through it.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, then it is necessary to cut them immediately for the belly, but you must also cover half of it, then cauterize so it does not regrow.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cover the thalus which is of pale color and poor sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For these abscesses are infected, and I will come to the treatment of pus afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is deep
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	if the appearance of the abscess comes from fire wound or cut of a boil, and is above the belly and in some of the bruises, as it has in other wounds, or of blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of moisture;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is by the bursting of the pustule and by the outflow of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of blood, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is for the issue of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two sides so it returns, and then it comes back, and perhaps if it is torn, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not strain too much.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to blood, it is open with these signs, the abscesses are large and hard, and it is closed according to an amount.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to windiness, then it is frothy at the touch, and the work is that you look to see if it is from the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must leave the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if it appears to be for the intestines or the bladder, then you must command the patient to stain his linen, and be completely extended straight, then sign all around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have signed all over, then extend half of the abscess above all the large joint;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind him tightly with a strong thread or a firm silk cord, and let him be completely wrapped;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then operate on half of the abscess extended over the limb, and insert your finger, and search for the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you suspect the shoulder is dislocated, and it is, then push it back into place, and push the intestines up from behind the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	And if you suspect the shoulder is dislocated, take it by the bone, and remove any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two pieces of thread, and push the two needles around what you have done in order to pierce.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it heals, and kill the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when you see it going underneath and protruding, then treat it as necessary, and drain the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the arrow or the moisture that you have removed, then treat the limb as necessary, and soak the limb.
dou chancre	For the fire cauterization,
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	we have said in the division the similarities of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid the treatment of iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let us say that the chancre enters into the marsh, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where one can remove it as with chancre that is in the mammaries, and in the chest, and similar places, and all of it must be removed when it is in the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	And when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I have never seen any heal;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	nor have I ever seen any heal before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the workings, when it is in its place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you remove any once the black bile of the body;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it heal if it has obvious overfilling, then remove the pain from the good place to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then pour out your boils or sores, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and cleanse the wound well with your hand or any other thing, and if the bleeding does not stop despite the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of hydrocephalus
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	we have said in the division of the resemblances of hydropsy, and how the assembly of the sharp is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is cured by fire.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only illuminated.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	And one should not touch iron in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	That is to say, tympanites and hypospadias, for it is a fatal matter;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	Therefore, when you treat this resemblance of hydropsy which is called "eclytes" of medicines, and the cure does not work, look if the pains are weak, or if he has another disease than hydropsy, as all and solution of the belly and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if not touch iron, for it has doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the pain of great virtue, and he has no other disease than hydropsy only, and he is not too thin nor too old, then thus one should proceed:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Hold the painful area straight above your hands, and the assistants press the abdomen by placing the sharp edge of the spoon at the lowest part of the belly, then take the spinous spatula in this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	and the point should not be too sharp so that it does not pierce the intestines when inserted, and it cannot be bent.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	Then look to see if there is any hernia towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	If necessary, you should make an incision of three fingers' width from the belly button downwards.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	And if there is a hernia due to the disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly button three fingers' width.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	If it is for the mucous membrane, then it should be to the right, and it does not matter that the hairs grow above the wound where the excess does not run to the weak limb.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	Then pierce all the skin with the tool, and push it through, and lift your hand to all the space between the skin and the flesh as if scraping at the quantity of one angle or inside.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the flesh until the space between the skin and the flesh reaches the desired depth, and this is the length of the blade, then remove it, and push this tool through this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light rain or chalk, and has a small opening at one end.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and has three small openings on its side.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on the other.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is shaped like a quill, and its form is like the incision that the scribe makes to cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	At the top of it is the hollow, so that when the ink comes to the tip, then you should now place the instrument inside.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	Empty the other third part, for if you empty it more than necessary at that hour, then by chance the pains may kill him from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he may lose his hand, or he may approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the evil mean, and its hairs.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then take the instrument and hold the needle, and it is now held by the one who stops the purulent matter that is above the tumor, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then begin the instrument again the next day, if you see the evil suffering, and take from the needle a small quantity.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and guard against following too much until it does not delay but a small amount of needle.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt the pain, and leave it for a long time, then the treatment of the sepulture or sand cushion, and with much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it becomes infected from drinking.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment of desiccate medicines until it is healed, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the staff
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever is born who does not have a cord in the staff, or the cord is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to prick often with a very thin needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put or plug a small piece of cloth underneath, and tie it and keep it in this way for three days or four, and when he wants to make urine, if the cloth is removed, and he makes urine, and then put it back.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	And by chance, it is not suitable, because the urine that comes out does not allow it to be closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the one who is punctured is small, then treat it with a thin silk thread as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who have not the phallus in their shoulder are impotent, because no one is born with a phallus at the top of their back, which prevents them from urinating before it leaves their back.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	And they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come just to the tip, and this is a very bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way of the work is such that the hairs grow on top of their back, and the phallus and the penis are like the tip of a feather, so that the phallus pierces in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and protect from the separation of blood which often happens, and if it does, if the stench of blood which comes from blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the staff
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	often come these abscesses in the thigh, and it is an appearance of a bad wound;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malicious and not malicious;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if it is necessary that you incise them at the thin skin, and cut and clean all, then put above cotton moistened in Egyptian oil;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of wounds continues until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if it is a bad dislocation, with a putrid color and smell, then you must apply the fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cleaned it, and if the splinter is in the back, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the splinter that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when it is removed, then the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat them together, do not be sure that the splinter of the bone is not broken, and it becomes black and corruption in its bone and where it is connected.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cover all that is black and corrupted with honey and flour paste made of ground pomegranate seeds and rice, then treat the other wounds until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	1. The fire cautery is helpful for two positions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	2. that is to say, at the extraction of arrows, and at the decay;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	3. and if the patient is corrupted and withdrawn, then it is necessary that you beat or conduct a lead rod through the wounds, and urinate on them;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	4. and when the flesh is erupted at the end of the rod that has been to those who have not yet been circumcised, or it has for a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scorch it with the instrument cheveit, until the sinews are loosened, and deliver the patient from all parts of the rod;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	If it is a difficult thing to divide the vein, then you must burn it with a small amount of heat from the tip of the knife and the scalpel.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Then thoroughly dry between two, and place a thin layer of linen moistened with cold water on it, so that it does not stick.
de la circoncision	For circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not different from other wounds in terms of continuity.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Therefore, when we perform this work of our will, and especially with children, it is a matter that we should do the best work, and the lightest in terms of health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not direct circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	Because I have seen the greatest part of masters and wise men who performed circumcision in the past, and with force, and all at once.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if there were two curtains, because it has two layers, and if by chance one is lifted up and the other delayed below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	and it returns covered, and the pain is doubled, and to the wound which is from the top is not always assured at the tip of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the wound of the finger by chance the iron escapes, and the work is ruined, and often they are born in such a way that they have no need of healing, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the wound healing which is done by force to all the length of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly throughout the entire length;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread be well stitched around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	And the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he listens, that you are only binding the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	Then place the child straight between your hands, and bring the forces between your hands or away from your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	Then close your hand around the rod and blow gently, and pull it up until the thread of the rod is tight.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then clean it well of the dirt that is gathered, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it away from one end to the other.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and the second joint of the second finger should be treated with the second herb and the correct index, and balance between the two joints, then lift the hand gently and take the head of the staff;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow slowly and slowly, for this is the most dangerous;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder a piece of cloth glued with the marrow of a well-cooked egg, tempered with rosewater, confected with rose oil and fresh, and let it stay on the other side, and the cure of the other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces at the purification is thus:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two forces should be equal and sharp, and the forces should also be as great as the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The error of the purification is that it is when the knife is inserted into the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	Therefore, you must extend it to your angle, as well as when the legs make abscesses;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	And the coping equally, and if you cannot hold it at your angle, then hold it with nails, and then the coping.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they pass three hours, and what is outside the rod is inflamed, let it remain until the abscesses are healed, and scrape lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you move the copper as you can move it, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Therefore, cure the limb of things that are dirty wounds of powder, which we have said or treated for powders, and if you copper too much care, it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure the wounds as we have said, until they are healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is of obstruction of stone, or of blood frozen, or of bowels, or of charred, or of similar things, which we have said in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if his urine is not released, and you see it is retained by the stone that is in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary to bend the hairs over his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and the feet are placed on his back, and he extends his belly from the upper part of the back, and restrains the hairs as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and therefore the neck of the bladder is pressed against the stone from above, so that the urine is released and;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the hairs cause great pain, then it is necessary to administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringe", of which this is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	And it should be of thin silver wire, as like a quill of an eagle;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and it should be the tail of a long and half-palm, and thin at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the wool or cotton bag to the head of the thread, and pull the head of the thread inside the catheter;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and fold the excess of the wool and pull it to the head of the catheter, then oil the catheter with oil or butter and egg white, and place the patient on the seat, and the urethra and the clyster of moist oil and olive oil and vinegar;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then lightly insert the syringe into the shaft, until it reaches the base of the shaft, then double the shaft upwards towards the bone.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then press the syringe forward just short of the bladder, and feel the hairs coming towards the empty space, and this is not done according to this order unless because the guide or it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then stretch the thread along the entire length of the yarn bit by bit, and the urine follows the yarn, then remove it far, and correct the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and align the hairs.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood comes into the bladder, and there is putrefaction and assembly, and you see distillation of waters and medicines, then do all the instrument that is called «clepsedre», and it is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and has three tubes:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	One on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the joint is opened by the doctor's knife in such a way that it does not damage the bone too much, so that if possible, the moisture can be drawn out and replaced as needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	And when you see your remedies going into the bladder, put the tip of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it out through the opening which is there.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	If you draw the moisture through the catheter, then strongly replace the catheter again.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	If the moisture enters again, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel the pain.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle plaster with which one applies a catheter to the bladder:
si est ci:	if it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	and it is of silver or of lead, and it is the highest of the following:
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and it is disinfected with salt or with lime where the legs are bent.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you see used to apply a catheter to the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a double thread of strong wool, and heat the poultice above the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then push the head of the plaster into the rod, then hold your hand over the bladder evenly with all the moisture, until the hairs feel that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	If you do not have a wad of cloth, take a piece of parchment and make a circle with it, and pierce it roundly around.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	Then stuff the thread tightly into these holes, then gather the circle as one would gather a bag, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it with the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And do as you did with the wad of cloth, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the wad.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the previous section the ways of arrows and extraction together with remedies.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	And I have said the difference between an arrow pierced in rain and all signs, and in which arrow one should make a cut.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the sharp blow of the bladder resembles a sharp blow in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it has a harsh sound, and great pain in the penis, and it can often occur, and then disappears.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and from many of these blows, the foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and it is light in the healing of children until they are four years old, and it is very painful in elderly people, and it is common among those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	And it is the lighter care of those who have large stones, than of those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with chalk, to draw out all the impurities that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never obstructs one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the misaligned joint by the feet, and make it stand up and move away from the center, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never once rise above the body.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	Then let him sit between your hands, and his hands be away from his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	Then grasp and touch inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	If you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if she does not chop at the touchier too, then grind your right index finger of your right hand with oil, if the hairs are short, or your middle finger, if the hairs are long;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and press at its base, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then apply the ointment to the anus;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press above your finger, and cut at the place where you saw it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the anus with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand to hold the testicles high, and his left hand to remove the skin which is outside the testicles in the part where the cut is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then place the spatula underneath, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	and make an incision between what is between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and it should be straight above the stone, and your right hand should be at the foundation, and the incision should be across so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	if the pressure from the hand that is at the foundation causes it to slip out of place;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and scrape away any stone or edges and margins;
si est griés a issir;	if it is gray to pull out;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is a thorn that is smooth and sharp, like a needle, and round, of which the extraction is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	In this case where it has angles and margins, make the incision wider;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, then you must hold the forceps that are also like a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you push out of the way the instrument sharply curved at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot grasp it thus, then enlarge the small opening, and if there is no skin, then strain it with vinegar;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And if there are more than one arrow, first remove the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are many.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it should be made larger, and a larger wound should be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the dislocated joint:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or it dies, or the urine comes out through the opening where the bones cannot be set.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but you must forcefully pull or tear it with pliers, until you remove it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and place above the moilliet cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and vinegar and cold vinegar, to relieve the pustule.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then resolve the misalignment on its own collar, and do not dislocate it from its joint again.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, rise the joint well with oil and vinegar, then apply ointment of mustard plaster and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if an abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained by it so that the urine is held back, which is known in some way as without a leak with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then place your finger in the wound, and extract that blood clot, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and rot it;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift the wound of sharp and swift and of silk, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that all the bandages you use to treat it, that you tie both thighs together, and place the medicines above the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted with a catheter, and tied off, and the urine cannot flow out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment I mentioned earlier, that you cut many times, is excused by this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this before.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron according to this form and be at three angles tied in one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	Then take a thread and tie it around the catheter outside the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the thread into the catheter lightly, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and slowly turn the forehead against the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if soon comes the urine, then press your hand above the stone that is remaining inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is already broken, and shoots out with the urine, and is sharp against the hairs;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that defends it, then tie a thread below the stone and another above, then make the urethra in the place between the two threads, then extract the thread, and release the other, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the care as long as they are healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	There is often a need to pierce in women, and if it happens even once, it is the care of the doctor, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	The first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in such matters, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who is well-versed in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	And the fourth reason is that if the woman's piercing is more forward than the man's, because it should be made with a deeper incision and great fear is involved. And if necessary, one must send to the surgeon, so it is necessary to have a skilled person, and if you do not have one, do not attempt to perform the operation yourself;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and present a skilled woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command that she do what you command of the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very carefully if the woman is virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to put her foot or base and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then hold her away from her base, and recommend that she put her foot or with the painful spot, and press and grind her right hand firmly on the anus.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	if she finds it, then it is necessary to move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh, against the middle down, where it is painful and feels the arrow in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move the arm above the stone or below, and let the cut be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then push the arrow into the wound, if you feel the arrow so sharp that the arrow can come out, and there are many ways of arrows.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to know, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with barbs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if you cannot pull it out, then put the arrow in vinegar, and hold it for an hour until the arrow is clean.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is fully removed, and have the tools that I mentioned in the extraction of the stone for men to assist you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it is not removed, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on the wound and bandages and ointments, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient might die.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, return to your work, until the stone is formed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	wet gauze is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white sponge, which is outside the court of the teeth, which contains the wound.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	And it is called "syphac", and it is never properly in the web of the eye, if one considers that it is from the other eye.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	And it is the thick skin between the white of the eye that we have said.
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	And it does not heal on its own.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this branch is weakness that comes to bones, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And if it comes from impact on the eyelids, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	Or it is a changing color from yellow to green, or without red, or black, or watery white, and there are more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And these are the signs to know this condition, because if it is white syphac that we have said, then the abscesses are present, and not long like the figure of an eye, and does not open the eyelids, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the own cloth, then abscesses are treated with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the fingers and the white sap, then it feels good.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, then test all the intermediary parts, from which it was previously formed.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introducer, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure them with iron, then it is necessary that the hairs be cleaned according to as much power and the replenishment of their bodies.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	Then the patient lies on his back, on one thing a little high, and puts much cloth on him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then lean over their right shoulder, and command the assistant to hold them on the left, and extend the staff against one of the two ribs near the sternum;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula and cover the skin of the ribs with it from the long bone to above the knuckle, and make your cut straight across the skin of the ribs just below the white line, and carefully scrape the subcutaneous tissue;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the white line flat with a sharp needle at a wide opening, and extract all the sharp pieces, and then put your needles, and stretch the white line above;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the bones of the ribs, but only the sinew.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	and cut out or even piece by piece the costal part of him subtly, for if you do not cut it properly, it will return to him sharply.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the joint springs up at your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sinew.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then gather the two books of the ribs at one seam, then treat it as with other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	and if the joint is corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the evacuation of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	Then apply the bandage to all the suspensory ligaments, and extract the arrow, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if it is sharp and assembled in two parts together, these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then apply the bandage to the other part as you have done the first evenly, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound linen soaked in red oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another linen soaked in wine and oil, and put over the two bandages, and put on doubled cloths, and tie it over all the limb that is according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths and place them according to this resemblance, and assemble them by sewing in the neck of the breeches, and one of them should be placed above the buttocks just at the back, and the other at the part of the elbow;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two should be placed above the two knees, and the entire assembly should be tied in a loop at the belt of the breeches;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and this branch of the fire cauterization should never be applied in the form of an iron needle, and it is that you should prick the skin with a fine cautery needle, and scrape the skin of the wounds, and heat it as we have said, so that the white scab containing the acid is removed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the fire cautery in this form, and pierce the gum at the teeth, and scrape the skin with this delicate cautery thoroughly.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And the copper in all ways that you can, until you remove everything.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	And be careful that the fire does not touch the eye.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	And make sure that this work is safer.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And keep from the correction of blood, and make sure that the work of tailoring fits well.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if nothing goes against you, or abscess or bleeding of blood or other thing, cure whatever goes against you, according to what is said above.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the pain is severe and does not want to endure this work due to its horror, then apply perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain that the acqueous branch is ready, place the painful joint on the elevated seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the outer part with a wide space, and place the perforation far down the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the openings be wide enough that all the sharp pain passes through.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the limb and tie it, and leave it to let the remaining sharp pain pass through, then care for it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	And if the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to exit from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a pen or the instrument used to treat the sharp edges of hydroceles, of which the form was previously mentioned.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And enlarge the wound slightly, and when the sharp edge returns, and is gathered after six months or within a year, and when it is gathered as before, and thus passes the painful days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	When cutting this branch, many positions cause fear in many people, for which it seems that it is better to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	And I will tell you the work and similar things about abscesses.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and simultaneously from the same.
et c’est par mout de cas.	And this is often the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excessive sharp and wet, which is spread out in wounds, or from impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	And the color of the abscess according to the color of the wound.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And does not find pain, and is a painful abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it is grayish, pale, and yellow in color, and never comes from a vein or an inflammation of blood.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, it is known by the position of the abscess being high, when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	Those who are made of wine grape are known by their arrangement in the expression of the two fingers, and can well make the waist above this resemblance, and above the others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you copulate the courtesy of the coins, then the eye is in the top, and the tail is of the white swan, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the eye.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the eye is already soiled with these coins, then it is necessary that you take the eye, and the copulation.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is air in the white swan, or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that which is held, and the copulation rounded.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the shoulder blade is broken at its base, then it is necessary that you remove it entirely, and extract the bone, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your treatments are completed, apply the wound with soft linen in red oil and wine, then use other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess surrounded by a pus-like envelope resembling a bone, with the softening of the joints, and the painful movement of the limb as it goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment of this disease is as difficult and dangerous as the previous one, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit with the misaligned joint on the highest seat, then lift the suspensory ligaments of the joints to your fingers, all the tendons that are close to the thigh, and stretch them evenly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut the sharp spatula through the wide area of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then I insert a needle or one with double thread, and tie it to the first limb where the vein came out, and tie it to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them straight in the middle, according to the length of the vessel, and remove the corrupted blood.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as for others or apply a bandage, so that no vessel is cut that would issue from one of the incisions.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	Because by this there does not come any harm, and if it comes to all the veins, then one must draw the cups from all the veins.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	If the person does not lose their strength by the incision of the veins, and they dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The advantages of this chapter are by the section that comes out or syphilitic, or the extension over the belly in the part of the groins, because the intestines descend from that break to one of the veins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this break is either by syphilis, or from the extension of it, and these two ways come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	from percussion, or from jumping, or from shouting, or from lifting heavy weights, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is the extension of the face, that is to say that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal up to the forehead, because the face is close to the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the section of the tooth, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and has various appearances of abscesses outside the skin, and this is for the outcome of the intestine and the heart due to the tooth.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the worms are found with the intestines, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer from the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron with fear, for which it is necessary to withdraw.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you command or let the hairs grow on the intestine at its hand inside the wound, if it can be pushed back in;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then place it over its neck between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then they put the hand above, and cover all the skin of the bones with it.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then push between the buttocks uncinated according to what you have skill to open the wound, and let them be such that the eyes can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then scrape the skin that is outside the bones of the ribs, until the white skin is exposed from all parts.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then push your index finger into the place that leads to the bone, between the white skin that is outside the ribs and between the second skin, and behind the rib, and between the second skin.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the finger to the right inside the curve of the nail, and place the white thread on top of your left hand, and lift the eyelid over the entire face towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to extend the eyelid upwards, and release what is behind the lower lid;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask if he has any intestine wrapped or white thread hard, and if you find nothing, then let him blow into the belly outwards;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle or a thick thread made of several threads, and blow into the back part of the eyelid, which is after the skin of the nail;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After the waist, then cut the tendons that appear from the hairs, until there are four hairs.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	Then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and tie it with a thread of two parts from the skin of pigs, which we have said is strong.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	Then wrap the tendons of hairs, and tie them in two parts, so that none of the wounds that they cause can enter into the flesh, so that an abscess does not occur.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	And then put the thread along the first thread of two parts of that, and after these two threads leave the thread which is from the skin of pigs, the great one of a dozen.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then all the other according to the roundness that the horse carries.
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is outside the skin of the hooves, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply a moistened linen cloth in oil, and put it on the wounds, and apply the remedy that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white facial wound that we have mentioned, after incision, due to fear of blood clotting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	for this has happened many times, and leave the cloth until it heals through it.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is slow to fall off, then soak in hot vinegar, and put on what we have said until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other treatment, until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made so as to be like the branch that is together with the view, in a way that you bind the vessels, after the cut slightly above the leg lightly.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cover it with a cloth, and treat the abscess of that which works, until the vessels die.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Never comes rupture and tears, as we have said, and open the veins;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not make any incisions into the intestines, and if they do, it is rare, and repair them hourly.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and in any case, if it remains too long in this state, the wound or abscess will continue to spread until the intestines are exposed.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this will happen due to the extension of the abscess which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and inflated and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cauterization, as we have previously mentioned.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never is the treatment done in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the misaligned bones are often pushed up against their back between your hands, then wrap the joint with a cloth inflated to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then strain the sinew that is outside the skin that toughens it, then take the raw and put it on top of the joint appearing from the sinew;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press against the front of the belly, then cut the two joints appearing from the sinew above the head of the raw, and cut both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then strain the head of the raw, and do not cover the sinew nor extend the belly or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the broken rib;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then, treat with the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the ligaments, defend and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The wound is closed, and does not appear in the tear, and the cauterization is quiet in this limb, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times, the leather of the knees is softened in some men, because the chariots that are inside are softened, and it is to be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is a matter, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the painful part lie on its back, and the copper on the softened skin over the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then gather the two lips to a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cover between the seams, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
dou chastrement	tremblingly
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Since it is customary in our law to use such things, and because I would prefer not to speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and they are only necessary for two purposes:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	one is that the patient may answer when asked, and in seclusion, the care;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is because we often have need of castration for animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rams and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that castration is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by traction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In what we do by traction, let us sit the animal in high heat, until the ligaments are softened and during.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	Then pinch them with your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the severe treatment of the waist:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You should sterilize the animal, and press the skin of the ligaments with your right hand, then tie the suspensory, and scorch each one as you have them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	And leave no pus or subtle pus that is on the tendons;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	And this method of severe treatment is more effective than that which is done by traction, because at traction something remains in the ligaments, by which the animal desires to luxate.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	For hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	There are two main methods for men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	One method is that between the two testicles, open as wide as the natural shape of a woman, with hair, and sometimes cutting into the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is in women, and it is like a finger as a rod and two knives.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment of the man and the woman is that you cut off all the hair around the wounds, and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second method, men who urinate through the skin of the testicles have no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tentigen
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Shaving is hair that grows above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have had it as large as a hand, and this is the care.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you remove excessive swelling from your hand or fingers, and gently rub it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not move it too much, as blood does not come, then treat other wounds until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and in another case where a child is born with a marshy mouth, and it is used, and sometimes it jumps out, and it is similar to a cow, and because of this they called the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to clean it as we have said the tenting, and the cure until it is healed.
de erratique	1. For the fire cautery, instruct
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic whether the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pustules are small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by fire cauterization, or deep lancing with a sharp knife, and is done in the marsh, or in the ribs, or elsewhere, or as it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and they prevent conception, and childbirth, and possibly the flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is by looking at the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	2. If the patient is close and appears to be in distress, then approach them or go to them.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is deep lancing with a sharp knife, and it is close to the liver, then you hurry, and do so thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two fingers together, and the woman is on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then the two books are formed, as long as the subtle surface is rounded, and is covered by the suppression.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	Then take linen, and dip it in oil, and place it on the limb, and grind the woman to a man every day, so that he cannot glue it.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the swelling is hard and sharp, it is necessary to apply a poultice similar to a leaf of mint.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the suppression is of chalk, then dip it in water and cover it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines steeped in blood, such as dragon's blood, incense, and an abundance of wax.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	Then apply a broad piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot glue together.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and then let it be long, and the bandage a tent of clean linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then care for other treatments until they are healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there comes charcoal, then cover it according to this manner, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For abscess which is in the bone, one should not touch with fire.
des emorroides	for hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Varicose veins are openings of veins which do not usually heal, and when the varicose veins are old, they become ulcers;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have had in the division the likes of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thromboses, when they are in the bone and do not open to the touch, can only be treated with fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the opening of the bone, which can be felt, are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the ulcer with needles, and cover it with its roots, then powder over medicines restraining blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then close his feet to the outside for an hour, then put them in hot water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if blood comes out, remove it and place it in a decoction of sumac and the skin of green pomegranates and galls and similar things, then take flour of wheat, mix with honey and egg, and make an ointment on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stains, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, apply suction cups to his back and breasts without causing injury;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take linen, and soak it in juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply to the limb.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess is at rest, treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And the one called "albathir" is red and resembles the harsh chief, so it should be covered as I have said for the thistle.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come from the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must advise in this treating the abscess that comes from the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that are filled with pus.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	And if you know the work of iron, look at the abscess to see if it is agus in the beginning of its arrival, and plain of cholor and fever, and if it becomes red, and if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not rush to pierce it, but let it cool until the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then place the misaligned part on the seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and support it on his back and gather his feet to the sides of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his knees be spread, and place his arms away from his knees, and tie them together with a strong rope;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then put the ball against his right side, and then introduce the instrument used to make the mouth of the wound, from which afterwards comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	And it is necessary that when you see this instrument to be administered, you first check the sharpness of the blade, so that what enters from the instrument does not come out more than it should, and that it does not cause harm.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	If the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the sharpness of the blade with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt it.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	And it is necessary that he puts the tip of the instrument on top, and stains the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscesses are open, and they do it by hand a lot, then it is necessary to cover the head, at the spatula level.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	And when the wound is empty, it is necessary that you place in the wound soft, moist cloths in rose oil or in dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	And place the flour bandage on the wound at the back of the marsh, and place it above the marsh and above the clean, soft cloth in vinegar or in hot water.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then the healer after two hours of bandaging, until it is healed.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	And never lift the marsh and the wound with a poultice of vinegar and honey, and then with vinegar or roots of lily and aristolochia longa boiled.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then reapply the bandage.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed in the marsh, it is necessary that you avoid cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The midwife is first to the birth that she knows the natural shape of the childbirth, and the signs if it is when you see the woman approaching, and wants to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then quickly take the child out.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then check that this childbirth is according to the natural shape, and it is the first out with its head, and the second with him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	because when it descends over its head, and the second is with him, and it is cleaned of its excesses by good washing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes above its feet, and comes from the back or the neck, and the hands, or it comes up its belly, or sometimes, and is turned by chance onto its shoulder, and by other bad figures.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	If it is the business of the bath that she is wise and skillful in these things, and warns against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes up its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the child's strength is weak, then let the midwife sit on a seat, or the women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	And let its natural oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then pour the liquid between his two fingers, using a small spoon of this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and scrape off the second layer, and cover it with a thin layer until the moisture that is inside has been removed;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and take the belly of the woman until the infant descends, and if it does not, then you should apply a muskilage of fenugreek with oil of sesame to the woman;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then let her swallow and spit out the mixture, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if now the infant is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to reset them gently and slowly.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then lower the chair to the ground, and lean the woman over, so she does not fall during the lowering.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hands cannot enter, and the child is dead, then place the hands under the child as previously mentioned, extract the child, and reset it gently.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out of its feet, it is necessary to lift it up high.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then slowly and gently, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the two feet and gently extend them.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	If it jumps out of place, command him to bite down, and make him spit out the condition.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps again, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, then turn it slowly and slowly, until it is in accordance with its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is completely straightened.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have experienced, say to take muscle relaxants of high potency, and oil of garlic, and melted wax, and grind everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put the natural remedy of woman on both sides and outside this incision, then make him sit upright until above the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	When it is softened, apply a mirepoix collar, remove it, and let it remain for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then place it on the seat, then sneeze and hold its mouth and nose, and gently press its belly, for it has now vomited.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child above its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, I place my hands on its back gently and gently.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	Then lean it against its neck, hang its legs down, and lie it on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	Then gently fold its hands, and then press its hands on its belly, and remove the diapers as it becomes clean.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if it does not move, take its feet and move them firmly, then move its belly upwards, then push with your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and gently shake the child.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and command the woman to push until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out widely a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot go, lay her on the bed, and firmly straighten her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the muscle relaxation that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	And if she does not give birth, then sit on the seat, then study to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	And give birth according to the natural shape, and make her spit, and command that she prepare until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and has extended its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife wash her hand, then return it slowly and gently, and give birth.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when it is equal, put the natural musk of aloe and oil, as we have said, then command that she move slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, sit on the seat, and command that she prepare.
et la fai esternuer.	and the method is to spit out.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner, for all the others
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner in the second method, if the second method fits your angle, until the moisture is drained.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if it can be felt above its face and above its neck, if the coping holds the bandage, that it is not held, and die the infected one.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then push the child inward, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she never do so again.
adonques si istra legierement.	Therefore, examine carefully.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It is said that gnomes are born many times, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	And these are strange things, and they do not live if not named;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and they are destroyed by the sweat that causes them, which is tied to the skin;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and never come out naturally like some others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out severely, as the cure we have said, and if the slight bleeding occurs, and do it quickly and lightly as it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so that it is worthwhile for health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	No one is formed in the marshlands I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is convenient that the baile saiche all of it, because perhaps similar things happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if he does according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you care for the woman of the child dead or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary that you save the woman if she is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her arms bent downwards, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the attendant shaves the pubic hair of the woman where she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the woman with moistened oil mixed with mustard and fenugreek seeds and linseed, then insert her hands into these oils and mustard.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then push them into the mouth gently, then wait until she bites the pieces that are suitable for the child, and if the child is present, be sure to deliver it over its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if he pierces the needles into his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or behind the beard or in the armpit or on the ribs, and if they descend below his feet, then he should remove or hold them at the sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he dye the needle on his right hand and place the burning iron between the fingers of his left hand, and lightly press the needle in any of the ways we have mentioned until the thing is empty.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then pierce against the other needle, or if you have the skill to do so, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then it is reset by moving from one side to the other, in order to move out, and hold the teeth together as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if any part remains, use a needle and thread to sew it back in place.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if it does not remain, put this jaw higher and continue until it is all out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes in front of the other and it cannot be brought back by force, then wrap it around the other arm until it all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then, place the copper in the joint of the foot or the heel, and thus you should do in the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck at the neck, or it has a sharp acute assembly, then you should push the spatula with spinous between your fingers, and make the head and extract the sharp.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you break it with the tool called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter that is after this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus do the same for the child naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull out the bones with pincers, and if the patient jumps forward and is held by the chin, it should be cut until the moisture that is inside or has come out is removed.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot get out, cut the copper into pieces and use it to plug the hole.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflated in the abdomen or out of the ribs, it should be pierced until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the arrow is above its feet, then the light attraction is on its legs, and the advice to the mouth of the marsh is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	and if it is swollen in the abdomen or in the groin, it should be stretched out on a cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut the abdomen or the groin until the moisture that is inside runs out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other member is broken, and the patient cannot move it, then push the ball of the hand against the marsh, and pull it out through the mouth of the marsh;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then push the pin or II, and pull it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the marsh is retracted due to an abscess that has come, then it does not need to be forced, but one must manage wet and fat things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and place in high moistening and softening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then manage as we have said for the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if they cannot, then let them try by pieces, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, let them treat as we have said in abscesses that come from the marsh.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And if an arrow comes out, it should be immediately bandaged and treated with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then consulted the other with that one, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses appeared in the armpit, and they swelled up so much that they burst open, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the patient, and I thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive, and some bones were stuck to it, and after some time others were stuck as well.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I dressed the wound, and in trying to remove the bone, the woman was not improved at all.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	And the woman remained long like this, and then a little blood came from the wound.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I did not remember this chapter until now because when the masters find something strange, they know how to use help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here comes the form of the compressor, by which we apply the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	And at the second turn, to the second question of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horn should be more slender than the restrainer, and be made of smooth or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	And its mouth should be the width of a finger and a half, and the edge of the trees should be one palm and a half long.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	And between the two joints should be two additional pieces of this same wood, which are firmly fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the marsh when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, should be made of flat iron or boxwood, according to the appearance of tongs.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	And it should have two joints, like you see, of a palm's length, and they should be wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	And when you see that the marsh is being opened with all the instruments, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs open, then place the two joints inside the marsh, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then work your hand with all the instruments, as you have done evenly, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marsh, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all above, and are multiplied in their similarities;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the mirrors have them all matched, the work is more rapid, and higher as men for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise this instrument because you have not prepared it, for their need is not excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you command the pain to hold its hair, and then let her excrete from condition, and your hands to the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	If she jumps through the sky, well then.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If the sky does not, then take a pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	All these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	Then put a cloth or poultice from the pot in her mouth, and the other head in the mouth of the marsh, and let the steam come inside the marsh.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make her spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second method does not work.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if she remains after this treatment and is not better, command the midwife to massage her right hand with olive oil or musk oil of high quality, and then rub it in the natural way, and apply the second one.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	And when she has found it, grasp and stretch it little by little and straight, so that the husband does not tear it during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	But move it gently to the right and left, and then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	If it comes out and dislodges.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the husband's mouth is stretched and injured, we have said the treatment of vomiting and fumigation of herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow it.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the marsh, that you tie it to the breast of the woman, then cleanse it with ointment tetrafarmacon.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if the pig will return and come back, and will be forced.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it returns if it comes with bad smell to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	If therefore, one must do fumigations witchcraft to that:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of celery and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears like glass, and one places the head subtly in its natural position, and the others wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and either the smoke over the coals, and the lice until they are destroyed, and then begin another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but it is stopped by some subtle swelling:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	therefore it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling at its proper place, and not pierce too deeply with the sharp instrument, and remove the position so that it does not touch.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on the wound a soft cloth in wine and oil, then the treatment of poultice until they are healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, place or press a bandage of cloth, and let it remain for some time, and be sure that the child wants to go into the room.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes this stoppage of wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	if it is necessary to cover that wound:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it is treated, as we have said of the dog's flesh.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the deep fistula
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the base are nodules, and grow larger than those that come above the base, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	And when that nodule is old, it works, and grows moist with white or thin blood, and never are those fistulas permanent.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And they are known by the fact that there is outflow or vapor when the wound makes an emission, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there are fistulas that protrude from the bladder, and from half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and reach up to the joining of the ribs, and out of the mouth.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula by its base, and not by its opening:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you should prick your index finger or base into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if there is twisting, then you should prick it with a thin tent of cloth, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not understand it, and it does not come from perforation, egestion, or wind, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	that it does not pierce through;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near the urethra, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it has pierced through to the joint of the elbow, then the tendon is drawn towards the arm;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the invention of the pain is not there, then it is that it is dislocated, and there is no medicine or salve that can help;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but labor, and the vanity of those who try to treat them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is not yet fully formed and is not yet ancient, in hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the hairs lie between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the legs are stretched up to their knees, and its knees bent towards its belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour water or mud, if there is twisting, until you clean or the tent comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the hairs feel painful at their base, then you must insert your index finger, as if you feel that the tent has pierced it;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and it is discovered or you feel between your teeth the bone or the horn, then spit out that it has passed.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if not, do not bother if it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	It is said that one can heal all things, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done, if it is to heat the fine cauterization according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and the whole mouth is filled in the fistula, until it comes out of the base.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these bones are broken, which are similar to a quill of an arrow.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Then the treatment of burned tent-cloth, until that one is healed, then the treatment of cauterizing with heat and sealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus sound, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If so, nothing else can be saved;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	And if it is placed between, and does not pierce just at the spot where it is based, and between your finger and the tent is a thick layer of charcoal or ash, and you see the fistula that results from the covering of care;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the copper at the beginning of the fistula is closed and pushed forward before the tent, and then the cauterizing after, until it reaches the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered from the tent, and fall.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then make sure those charred ones that seem like a goose quill, and none remain denying it.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot remove it, and cut between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery accomplishes two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these charred ones, and the stopping of blood and the sealing of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of muddied tents with butter or in a mixture broken down, until the lees are poured out, and the charred ones are burned in the pot.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound of the soaked arrowheads with hard charcoal, and the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from just above the base, and is distant from the body, then press on the top or base, and ask for water.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between them is the cloth or the saw or the charcoal where it is near to pierce, if there is no other remedy than hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just above, or if you can, put bandages and treat it as first aid.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not move too much in front, so that you do not cover the part that holds the foundation, and brings the excretions by the way of voluntary movement.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	If by chance it is fractured, then you will remove that covering and the bandage as soon as it is cut below the foundation, or by tent or by other instrument appointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	Then examine this wound which is in the sore, as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	Then study to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is where it costs the foundation below the skin above, then take a tent perforated at the head according to this form.
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And push the thread into the fistula, and push the tent along the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If she is persistent on the edge of the foundation within, then hold the thread of that perforated one, so that you bring your own or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and trace the head of the thread, and gather the two shoulder pieces together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for one or two days.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold it not once, until the thread covers those charred parts that are between them, and heal.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed and clean.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then prick it in all possible ways that you can, but do not make it too thin.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make the bandage too thin if it is too thin, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spiny bone that is made into a fistula is very sharp and one-sided;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, not for the reason that we do not know what we should not do, as you see here:
des emorroydes	des emorroydes
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two ways of doing it:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	Or they are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and some cause bleeding, and there are one or more, and they are under the foundation and at the base of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	But those that are underneath have little moisture, and some cause bleeding or a little bit of sharp citrine or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and for those who have them in the foundation, it is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, so that they may shine in other chambers, until the foundation is full, and they open the son.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you are in a hurry, and you can do it with pincers, or you hold it at your nail, then cover it in its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them with their moistures, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of linen.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them to your fingers, then cover them, and powder with any hot powders that are in the work of cauterization.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat other ailments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the base cannot be lifted, apply a sharp and biting cautery to clean what is stuck at the base, so it can be removed openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the hairs are tightly attached to the base, and if the base is very deep, then the treatment is light.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grasp them with your fingers or pliers, cut them off, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary to suture according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a thick thread, and make it into a needle, then pull the thread through the top and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is too wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread firmly, then cut the thread, and pull out the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put above the wound a soft cloth dipped in red oil or cerate, and put above the wound, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it remain until they have healed, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and without delay at the base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often occurs in the intestines and due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you reset it at the tip of a small knife or at your fingernail, which does not allow it to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then treat it until it is as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before until it is fully healed and scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	dry heat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Mice are a small appearance that grows on the body and spreads quickly.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and never the cold, and they feel it as if they were dying of cold, and it comes to the whole body, and more in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a pen of vulture very strong, and place that quill on the cold, until the circle of the quill completely encompasses the cold.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand all around the quill until you cover all around the cold, and put it in warm water, and extract the cold from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make a suture of a needle of rain or iron in this form, and be subtle to remove and raise it up:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Do not let go, to hold at the two ends, and to press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see that the heat of the cautery is too much, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of this ointment
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Never do you make a plaster with silver, lead, or tin, whether melted or in powder form.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And never do you make these small and large instruments, according to those that you will bring.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those that you should arm yourself with in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of this ointment is above wide, or the belly is bound according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	And if there is a discharge or the belly is tied, as you see, and the wound is inside, then pierce.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	And if there are two perforations on one side and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	And if the belly is filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and you pierce all around with small perforations, and there is one inch of space between each perforation, then insert a strong thread through each perforation, twist it around ten times, and tie the belly as if it were a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	And when the medicine is inside, if the leg has an instrument in front of a strong thread, then cleanse.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it is in the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the cleanser with oil or a similar substance, then gently press it in.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	Then the minister holds the patient's hands together until it is all visible, then remove the cleanser, and relieve the pain in their legs by holding them parallel, and if the medicine wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And if he sleeps a whole night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the poultice in the case of diarrhea, and the patient wants to come out, let him come out as much as possible; and if he is healthy again, continue.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the wound is on the base or an abscess, then the poultice should be as gentle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And this is the form of the gentle poultice over which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	with wounds:
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you the remedies for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to how they are made, and according to the limbs or wounds that are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are from piercing with a stone, and cutting with a sword or dagger, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	when they are done according to the laws of the body, such as wounds that bleed above the neck, or above the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then be careful if it is from piercing or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess forming:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if the patient is immediately healthy from the cerebral itself if he comes little of blood from the wound, and let the healing be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and avoid the hairs from being replenished with wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, let his food be made mild, and he should not drink wine, nor change his char.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if abscesses come, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in vinegar stiptic.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh and full of blood, and it is not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the arm has been moved, put some splints on it until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be closed by tents, then sew them together as I will say in wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to bone, and can be moved, but only holds at one point, then suture it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and replace hard charcoal in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat less fatty foods, such as meat and cooked grains, like chicken, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find decayed skin or rotten flesh that does not touch the bone, then cut it all away, and pour vinegar on it, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	If he has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and he cannot stop the bleeding with medicines, then tie the artery, and if you remove the tube, then bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if it does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and you put in this powder that sours as soon as the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take incense a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	blood of dragon two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	Live charcoal in three parts, and the powder finely, and fill the wound, and let it form a scab, until it heals well and joins to all its sinew.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	And then tie it firmly, and leave it undisturbed unless it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never use only chalk, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the art has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound moves again immediately, then do not put any of this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put some digestible ointments or poultices made of barley flour and honey, until it weeps.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat other ailments until they are healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fractured bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then use fine forceps to extract it;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the main fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the previous one, but if the wound of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a nerve, there is no other method than to let the wound heal, and not put anything restricting, because it harms nerves and causes them to retract;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything flat on the wound, because the substance of nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is one of the highest members;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but if the medicine is wet, like chalk washed in sharp sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the cloth washed similarly in sharp sweet water, and other stones in this manner, and moistened with warm water.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then use bandages to bind it, and treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is hairy and full of flesh, then prick or lower the limb.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and there comes out blood, then drain, wash, and cauterize as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the arrow is cut from the throat or the wound, and the conduct is kept, by which the meat goes, then cut the arrow above the back of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then gradually release it, and let it rest for some time, then treat the wounds until they are healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	if the wound has made an impression on the bone, if necessary;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, try to remove them all if possible, and those you cannot remove, leave until the wound heals, and then disinfect and align the fracture;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, apply the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then the treatment as I have described in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of spear or of dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a spear or dagger wound, and the wound is deep, look to see if there is any whiteness or foul smell coming from the wound:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	Then immediately apply bandages to stop the bleeding, as if the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	And if it is not deep and fresh with blood throughout the wound, do not apply powder or bandage immediately for the first hour, so that it does not stick to the wound and prevent healing from occurring.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	But apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	And if you do not have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb excess moisture, and keep it quiet for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If no spasm occurs, nor does trembling of the heart prevent it from being strained.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see good positions, if you cut that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the wounds and other treatments, until they are healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot heal, and work, then cut that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is of incision by sword or knife, and it is simple, or worse or at the back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	If it is large, of sewing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	And if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and if it has chipped off pieces, if the wound requires them, and the remaining shards, if they are suitable.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	And if they are not suitable, leave the wound to fester, so that it aligns with the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds on other limbs, it is up to judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	abdominal hernia
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are large and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	Of the great wound, none of the intestines ever jumps out, or the nerves of the intestines, because of their insertion into them.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	And the sutures are more painful, and it is never worse than a small wound because if one does not put the intestines back in properly, they will not heal properly.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the heat, and they are put back in properly, and it is better to have a minor wound because one can easily rotate the intestines back into place as with other limbs.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And there are four ways to treat a wound in the abdomen:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common sutures are in the abdominal wound suture, and the suture of other body wounds and two other proprietary sutures are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	And all ways they are cleaner with the stitching of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is protruding, and it is a good thing to put back, this is by one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is hot, warm it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or a piece of clean cloth in cold water only, or boil in cold water with vinegar and pepper and salt, and steam the intestine until it is swollen is softened;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never made this wine with restraining, and it is muddled that one soul for dissolution.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the inflammation disappear, if the intestines are moist or alkaline and misaligned, for this is aligned with the entrance of the disease.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little hole in the wound with the tool used to remove tumors.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first care is to muddle that the cut, that we should not cut without great necessity.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the tool for the cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut into the wound and do not find it, and see its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, put them back in their natural form according to their own place, if you can, for this is good.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and in the lower abdomen, then it is necessary to place the injured limb on its back, and raise its legs higher than its head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower abdomen, then place the head and the foot higher than the other parts, and also if the wound breaks through the belly, place the injured side higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to follow what I say in large and moderate wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, apply what is at hand that has been previously prepared, then put between your hands the healing ointment that covers the entire wound and brings together the lips.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	And this is the common method of stitching, and it is that you pinch an needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave some space from the edge of the wound, and if it has good thread, sew with a needle.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	And pierce the two needles through the two pieces of leather, which is outside the leather on that side, until you make it pierced from that part, and bring together the two ends of the needle four times.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the thread of a doubled string around the needle of half a span, then assemble the two parts of the wound evenly, and then leave one span of space, and there make another stitch.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	Then tie the thread with a doubled string as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you know about needles until the whole wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	And let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick, for thin needles cover the whole wound, and too thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	Therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it does not matter to put the needles too far from the back of the skin and leather, so they do not puncture and open the wound before the stitching.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the wounded by the needles, so they do not cause the pain at night, and put bandages or cloths on the wounded by the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it only requires one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second method of stitching is common, and it is that you gather the two pieces of leather and the two pieces of silk together with one needle with a medium-strength thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	And when you have perceived these joints all together, then reset the needle at the part where you began, in the manner that one does with drills.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	And put a space between each stitch the thickness of a thread.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch goes through the man, and I sewed a wound that someone had in his belly, which was cut with a knife, and was the wound more than one inch wide, and it extended into the intestines by two inches, and was the wound inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was dressed with a poultice after 15 hours, and it was treated, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the man had been judged that he would die, and it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not heal it from burning, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed moss twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two main methods of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and the thread from the part in front just inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the heart of the wound in a straight line, then insert the needle at the top or where you put the thread, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside just outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this stitch is that you sew as the tailor makes the fur, and you leave once the needle of one part, and the repeat of another, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way of stitching, which Galen properly calls, is that they assemble the two parts naturally together, and apply one end of the needle to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	fashion a needle or head of the marrow close, and make it pierce that part alone, and leave the two ends of the thread.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from that part before this within, the two ends of the thread.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both the upper and lower parts of the affected area from below upwards, in two other points called the miracles on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the most common method of sewing and repairing it.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Those who know this saying, and no one testifies to it, you should sew the belly with two needles, or have thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew lace.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	And it is more difficult to sew where the tear is in the belly than other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you clean the fresh wound of all its blood, as soon as the wound has moved, if you reset the intestine and the cost;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder of healing charcoal, and if the wound has moved, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and bandage the wound, and let the sage and marjoram be present;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with the others until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	If you do not have any medicine, place it on top of the wound as soon as it begins to bleed, and apply a soft cloth, and shake it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you should not use any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound does not cause communication with the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light bandage in oil of warm chamomile or rose oil, and place it inside the angles, and remove it from the joints;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or burning in the bowels, and often occurs, then enema of black wine and immediately if the burning comes to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For the puncturing of the intestines, and such things as when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is raw, and this is due to the smallness of the veins that are in it, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and its proximity to nerve nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the splinter jumps from the wound, and it is put back in place as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and turned black, then you must tie the limb that has turned black, for blood does not come, as there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	Then cut open the belly that is between the limbs, and put the two pins hanging from the part away from the wound, to align the extraction when the splinter breaks, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breakage of the pot
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the internal organ is pierced, and the wound is small, if it can be put back into some people, because I saw that some men were impaled through the belly by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it was prolapsed and became a fistula, and in this way there was excrement and vomiting;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to subtly treat it until it was healed, and the wound sounded.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it healing, I doubted that there was no evil in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but it remained in better conditions, and changed and hydrated.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he should be tied in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take large needles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, if it puts it above the two lips, so that it holds its mouth above.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cover the needle, and hold it so that it cannot slip, then put the other needle after in such a manner as before, until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	and treat the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If the arrow pierces into the intestines, and no harm comes to the patient, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the tip of this intestinal thread that is very sharp, and then tie it to the tip of this thread with a thin silk thread, then pull the thread through the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it back into the wound;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing is not far from the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no treatment or health, because of its subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	all wounds or abscesses, when they are covered, are universally called "fistulas," and specifically when they are cut and opened up.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is along the spine, a hard and white sore, where there is no pain, and it is as sharp as the quill of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never in a clear archway, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	never too little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no scar, it is only because of one of the EIGHT causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
ou por sa malice;	or for its evil;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard charcoal inside, and on the lips, which does not allow fire to come out;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or it has too much blood.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the bones are broken, and the matter is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the cure.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is like a plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and blown away by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	when there are openings or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicines in that section.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas that are made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the costes, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes from the principal property of the member, and similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all wounds of this kind are of great suffering, and there is only labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	And if there is no wound that does not come immediately to the place that I have said, and you are confident of the cure, and you know how to do it, then take a tent of tin or iron, if the wound is straight, if it is crooked.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	And if the wound is twisted, then circle it with a thin tent of cloth, because the cloths bend around the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	And if the wound is perforated and you cannot well encircle it with tents, then cauterize one of the perforations, because the moisture goes from one perforation to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then carefully examine your patient, whether there is bone or tendon, and if it is broken in two pieces, and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when you press on his hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know truly where the bone is, and if it is far from joint, or tendon, or artery, or vein, or in any of the limbs that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the fractured piece and the corrupted parts that are inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure until it is healed, and if the fistula is well deeply in the right place, then you must cut across, as much as you can, then put soft sponges in medicine ague, and press them against the mouth of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous matter that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I apply a warm, clean cloth to the wound until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not clean by this method, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the sinus, then drill it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves are not injured or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then scrape away the corruption until it is all bone, then apply a warm, clean cloth to the wound until it is clean.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not clean, and remains red as before, then be careful not to go too far with the treatment:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	If you discover and wish to be at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the limb.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	And if it is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, seek that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot proceed;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other means than to wait for nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pincers, if the instrument is suitable for that, and if there are many bones, then remove them all, do not leave any behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	And if the moisture makes it opposite, and there is no error or fear, then heat and moisture and char, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place a warm poultice on the wound to reduce inflammation, and leave it until the flesh is softened around the bones, and then they will be more easily removed.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if they are large bones, such as a leg or thigh, then cut through the flesh until the entire bone is exposed, then close the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of the corruption, and it comes to a mass around the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	then it should be cut off all around the corruption, and then treat it until it is sound.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg and was filled with a large abscess, and there was no cause to open it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the wound healers over-opened it so much that the abscess opened, and they let out a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there was a lot of pain that everyone was groaning and sweating from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	And many doctors and surgeons for more than two years, and there was no knowledge in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw her leg and the medicines with which they were treating it, and what was happening through the pores at great speed.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red the veins of youth, and had the color yellow.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings, and found that one was coming against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I therefore hurried, and took from one of the pores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption was coming into the bone from within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I thought what appeared to me of the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, but that which I had taken.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with herbs soaked in long time, and could not stick together;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then re-examined, and found the bone as before, and discovered continuous corruption in the bone, and the flesh, and then removed it, and I could not heal the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could only remove as much as a palm of the bone, and treat it to its entirety, then heal it with herbs;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and stuck together quickly, but did not want to begin the work again except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation of blood often occurred, but he was completely healed, and born in the place of the bone, a hard char, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction at all, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the tooth is broken in any part of the jaw, it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the root, and strain it at the top of the bone that opens, and command that it not be extended upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another thread of linen thicker than the first thread, and tie it above the bone that is outside the bone, and extend the top, so that you remove the rotten part from the outside, and cover the bone above the jaw where you see it should be, so that it does not become rotten;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a piece of cloth outside the bone to cover the rotten part;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it should be as much silk as one can see and feel the corruption, and be another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the tooth is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then remove the whole char.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	Then put the cotton on the other side of the corruption, and the silk from one part to the other, and let the silk be as long as possible near the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	And if the corruption is in the joint, then copper the corrupted joint, and let the silk be in the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	If its corruption is in the continuation of the second joints, there is no other remedy than to cut.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	And if its corruption is at the tip of the finger or toe, this is very difficult, but nevertheless it is necessary to inquire about that corruption, how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	And cleanse it in all the ways you can, but do not let the vein or nerve make you contrary.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And scour that which the incisor and the silk for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of teeth, and their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	And therefore, it is necessary to arrange each similar work's tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	And the work will show you the tool that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If you have a tool according to what it needs.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders may become dislocated either due to within, or due to lack of.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	And when you have treated that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corrosion comes, so that the pain escapes by the death, or by the malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, so it seems as if it has been burned by fire, and it remains black afterwards, for then comes the corrosion of member upon member, and it takes hold throughout the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if you have a bite from a poisonous beast, such as scorpions of the sea and snakes, if the corrosion is at the center of the wound, and the copper, and do not give it any space to come near your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	and if it comes near your hand, and the copper is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come near your arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, then place the cup at the elbow.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the amount of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and as soon as the cauterization comes or pain:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then place the cup after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to pain, then place the cup over all the pain.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up the leg, then place the cup at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the bad one die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	And the manner of the copper or the cloth that the limb is bound with is such that you bind it above and below, and extend some ministers on one side, and other ministers on the other side, and you soak the flesh that is between the two limbs to the width of a spatula, until the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then the copper or cloth, and put a piece of linen from each part, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy limb, and comes to the other injury and abscess and boil;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if blood comes out when you work, then cauterize the limb firmly, or put some stopping powders on it;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medical practice until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a bandage suitable for its condition, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in the same situation:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he suffered from a blackness that seemed like fire burning, and this corrosion first attacked his right side, spreading throughout the body;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the doctor saw the corrosion, he covered the body with ointment, and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and for many days afterward the corrosion returned to his right hand, and it came to me, and I put him on things that were reflected after washing the body, and could not stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wishes that I hold his hand, and I do not want, unless I have hope of repeating the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and he also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the ointment was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he completely lost hope, and returned to his land, and began to cover his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I did not count on anything further than for others to do something else, if they have the matter at hand.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	An abscess never comes in a thin limb, and it lasts so long that it causes great swelling.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then pierce and puncture, and in its outlet the bowels, and let the joints remain as they were, like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is also as thin as the cloth you remove, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinew" and are not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the front, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin if it is that you cover that skin all around, and at the same time when it is thin, like a cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not stay in place for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have sworn that the skin does not stick, and the corruption is not yet in full bloom, and the skin is charred, then the cure of the ointment is as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the wound is large, and the belly that is in it has a foul odor, then the ointment of Egyptian medicine made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	Take garlic, oil, and lead, equally, and put to cook in a small pot over the fire until the medicine is red, and thickens as much as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	And then take it according to your need, and make it into a powder and a syrup, and apply it to the chest, and hold the pulse steady.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	And leave the medicine in for two hours, then expel it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times until the chest is clean and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	And never apply the powder of ash, when this medicine is not present, and you should squeeze ashes from grape vines, and pour boiling water on top, then let it cool, and apply it to the chest, until you see that the chest is clean.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the patient cannot bear the pain, neither Egyptian medicine nor the burning powder will help, but rather the mustard plaster or honey poultice with a little laudanum.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	Or you apply the honey and wine poultice, where the honey has the property of healing and cleansing, and the wine makes the wound ferment.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	And when you have done this, and you have confirmed that the wound is healed, then apply the mustard plaster that makes charcoal in it, and it is that you hold a definitive poultice, and they make with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	and you cauterize the wound with some medicines and oil, of which I have spoken about their properties or treating burns;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the pus in the wound is small, and the opening of the wound cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle a little, and put in an Egyptian tent of oil or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it alone until the skin or wound can enter, and if the pus that flows is above, then cover or higher than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	When the bone is in place, do not let it become infected with char.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	And if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bone is at the lowest point where it is, for when the bone is in place, do not let it become infected with char, and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the wound gently slopes downwards, and leave nothing of the wound.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidative remedies to put on the wound, and place them under the cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	Then apply a compress to the wound in the place where it is slightly larger than the first, since it is often inflamed and swollen on the other cloth according to the size of the wound, and put it on the wound of the healthy part to align the bowels, and do not remove the large dressing until after several days once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	And the one that is on the wound of the healthy part often removes to remove the bowel, and checks what comes from the bowel, whether it is poison or a little or enough, or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in some way and you see the nature that jumps on the wound of the healthy part, if the breasts have already been raised, and approach the healthy one.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	And then dislocate it in the morning, or at midday, and when you dislocate the wound, change the dressing, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are not digested well after many hours, force them to stand upright so they do not sag.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if the subtle poisons are cut after long waiting, do not despair of the patient's health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who delay in applying char to their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if they apply it undigested, a sudden jump of the breast after many hours, so that the breast does not move;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast is delayed in moving, and is distant, then apply medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, such as poultice definitive, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take a definitive grip, and make it with red oil, and the bandage of old wine even in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	Then cook and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	And this very thing is best cooked and thickened when a definitive grip is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey as it is over the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	And then glue the cloth, and place it on the chest, and never administer aristologue along with long roots of heavenly lily, which is also like flour of times and hundred.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder from them, and put on top of the honey I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is long, and not cured by this cure, then scrape away that the corruption is removed, and make an impression in the bone, or on hard members, or on limbs;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises from outside the joint of the little finger of the hand, or the toe, or by chance arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	And when it is dislocated, and no care is taken, if an abscess comes, and it is covered and poured with boiling water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps the whole hand.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	And when it comes to the corrosion of the bone, until there is painful putrefaction, and the affected part is very swollen, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, then you must remove all the remaining superfluity of the finger, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	And if the nail is close to the bone and begins to poke, and the wound, it is necessary that you put the raw cautery outside of the nail so that it does not pierce, and bring the remaining char upwards, and cover this char subtly and lightly, and place above the remaining char medicines of fire and corrosives to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the remedy of ointments until they are healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, if it breaks and rots, because as much as the bone corrupts, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you see the tooth rotting, if it breaks and rots, then apply the remedy until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	And if it is fierce, broken, and bleeding, and the patient feels great pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	Then cut the gum apart in a crosswise direction, and guard that the cut does not reach the bone beneath, because the pain would be too great.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if it happens, put something on top to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a sharp sound from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The ones that give birth in the hands of some men are all charred, and sometimes they have teeth, and sometimes they have a hook, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in any of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Those born without any joint do not move, and those born at the joint may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The belly of one who is chubby is lighter in some way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	belly it is at its root of a wide space.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Those born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure:
si te tien dou coper.	if you have this copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born or must lie on their backs, it is necessary that you first cut the flesh around the bone roundly to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk according to this, then care for it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in this way come from birth, or from the wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is appropriate that you cover that which is sour, so that they return according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then put between two tents or moist cloths with rose oil, so that they do not stick.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	where you place between two pieces of soft cloth, until the bones are heard, as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to either of his two hands with the back of the hand, then apply the bandage as it should be done.
des vils	of the evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large and surrounded by excessive melancholy, which come from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more often occur in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should never administer any purgation of clay, and then the healthy one from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The treatment of iron is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is to remove the rust, and then draw out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The cut is made in this way:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	The first leg of sharp hot heat was very strong, until the large one was not subtly removed, then the leg with the bad joint was stretched down from above the knee to the part below the groin.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in the arm, or in the second or third, of a wide size, then lift and pull out the black blood with your hand, from one to the other, as much as the virtues of the bad joint can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	And then bind it, and command that he be shaved with a black charcoal.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	And then restart the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are empty and the joint is exposed.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The application of this method is as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	If the leg is dislocated, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and the leg is heated with hot water until it turns red, and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it at the fire, and then cover the vein long at the top of the thigh, or in the part below the knee;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the bottom, and scrape the vein from every part, until it appears when touched;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one can see it red and black, and when it enters or skin seems to resemble a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then press the ray of dislocation, as long as it is away from the skin, and then one can lift it lightly, then the other joint in the same way for three days.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the wrist, as you have done, and one can lift it at another lighter place, as you have done first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another size, or if you have skill for it, then lift it, and one can lift it to the second joint of the finger, then remove it and lift it to the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	Then extract it from shoulder to shoulder, as far as it is fully extended, then bind it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	And if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert a needle into the thread strongly doubled, and tie it and pull it, and move away from the other side, and turn your hand from one side to the other, as far as it can be pulled.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	And beware that it does not bind, for if it binds, then you cannot pull or lift it, and it will cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	And when you have treated it completely, put soft cloth soaked in wine and rose oil on the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the care as long as they are healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the joint is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must forcefully untwist it, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have previously mentioned.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron that covers the joint, if it is curved and does not cut through, then it should not cover the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And it is of large curvature, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the vein civil
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is injected into the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance arises in another part than the legs, and this has the property of causing the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the body, serpents and worms, inject between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if there are signs of the beginning of this wound, such as a very large inflammation in the leg, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to open, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound is open, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two inches wide, and the cloth, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not there, if you wrap the cloth around the cloth, and the cloth;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part, wrap it around, and do not cover it at its root until it is completely out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it off, it will enter into the bone and cause abscess and infection or damage to the limb, and severe illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	therefore it is necessary that it be treated carefully and gently at the head, and nothing remains or cuts.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and there is never this vein when it is treated from the length of one palm, or ten, and sometimes it comes to me, which issues from ten palms in length, and when you cut it, it bursts or pierces, and cuts through to the bottom, so that all is inside.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and empty out the matter that is inside, and apply to the patient medicines infused with garlic juice on any day, then treat as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And never again to this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the finger, or toe, and much blood comes out, and it is difficult to stop;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	then treat as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of verses that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease", because it often affects cattle, and is a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, going up and down, and is felt well from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it was, and jumps out;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by the accumulation of certain humors, such as those that come out and wriggle and worms and ascarids or intestines;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and one doubts its harm, for as it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the brain, perhaps it enters, and destroys the brain;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this has often happened.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it to cure and draw out, then one cannot do otherwise than when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	so it is necessary that you tie the limb above and below a very tightly bound bandage, then cut across and draw it out, and if it turns back into the body, and you do not retrieve it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it consumes oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold it firmly away from it, then cut it off and remove it.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the mundificament of corpses of medicines dissolved for the evil humors by poisoning. And if it becomes infected with bad meat, it will cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she revealed to me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and soon after, I saw it rise as high as the shoulder, faster than anything, as if alive when cut from the limb;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain separated from the limb and settled in the shoulder, then after a while it corrupted throughout the body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that she had turned around in circles around the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I greatly marveled at how it moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this disease move in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	However, I wanted to move the pain from one limb to another, but I could not, as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because that appearance of that constraint of breath.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And they do not reveal themselves according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see how to cure this disease, and the pain feels as we have said, if it opens as we have described, then hold the limb above and below firmly, and then cover it with a cloth until that constraint of breath is relieved.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the limb.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your own eyes, then treat the cause of that constraint of breath, such as foul-smelling pills, and serpent pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their similarities and according to the types of bodies they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The varieties of them are such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and curved, and smooth.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	And of those that have the angle, and of those that have tongues, and of those that have pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	And that which penetrates into any member if it penetrates according to the ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	Or in a principal member, such as the neck, head, heart, lungs, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it penetrates therefore into any part of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter appears to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	If it is necessary for you to perform the extraction of this arrow, for many die afterwards in various positions.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully embedded, remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces and penetrates the bone, and the facial nerve that is above the skull, is when there is scotomy and sode, and esvertin and roujor ens, and inflammation and roujor of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and by chance it is without force of the nostrils, or of the ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance it is the speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and white matter like pus leaks from the wound, and also boils out like broth of cheese.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then take care of the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it pierces or enters, is that it is near the right breast, and also feels like it was stuck in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves like boils, and also cuts through black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and syncope.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Therefore, without doubt, the dead will rise.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a wound that does not heal is that without any pain, bubbles rise from the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and it gasps for breath and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the roof, it is below the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and there is great blood and great pain and breathing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And all the members of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the stomach, by chance if anything of undigested meat jumps from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the belly, and nothing comes out of it through the intestines, there is no hope of cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bladder, and the urine shoots out and comes out afterwards, and the pain is very great.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Therefore, it is a mortal wound.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, such as the hand and neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and forearm and wrist and fingers and legs, and similar members, are safe according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to the man that an arrow hit him in the knee at its base:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and it was taken out from another side, away from the ear grease, and it was healed without a trace.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And in a game, there is an arrow that pierces the grease of oil outside the paper outside, and the arrow is recovered, and it can only reach the tip towards the fist, and it is a large arrow of a Turkish bow, all the iron light without ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	the game was safe, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And in a game, there is an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it is an Arabic arrow with ears;
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I sought the arrows, and subtly I found it, and it was safe for the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I inserted an arrow into a man, which was in his head or stomach, and thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after thirty days, he did not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and pulled it out, and inserted it again, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you want to a man who has an arrow that has fallen out or back, and the wound is sealed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and remains inside him, and does not change his natural condition, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you want to another man, who has an arrow that has fallen out into his face, and the wound is sealed over;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and prolongs thus without great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And a arrow was stuck in the man of the king, which was his neck in the middle, and it was somewhat inclined to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for healing after it had been there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I found it all in a very thin tent, and I did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt sharp pain and pain on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put above his head a poultice of digestive attractant, because the wounds did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and to me appeared the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I immediately applied the ointment on it, and soothed the wound directly, and waited until the pain subsided for a long time, as he felt the arrowhead inside his nostril.
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied the corrosive medicine on the wound immediately, as long as it was open, and I tested it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking to the skin.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I pushed it into the opening of the wound with that medicine until the head of the arrow appeared clearly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	And it passed well the ends within four months, and then ulcerated the wound that I had sown the stitches, and one from one side and the other, and could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Therefore, I continued to subtly and ingeniously manipulate tools, until I took it on the next day with well-made stitches, according to how its form would come at the end of this chapter, as I do, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctor judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and it was healed the wound, and was completely cured of all pain.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your care on what I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the wise masters know well very little, and what is present and lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, for the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from members unless they are pierced for two reasons:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the limb where they enter, or by another part.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	And that which comes out by the way where it enters, is an arrow entering through the muscles, and never comes out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is ready to be placed around it, and also to make an opening for the release.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot be released, let her remain thus for several days, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then she jumps, and if she does not jump, pierce all around with a thin needle, until the surrounding tissue is expanded, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the skull bone, and goes towards one of the bellies of the brain, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if not pulled immediately, but left until it is even after some time, because if the arrow comes out too soon, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not embedded only in the bone, and does not come out of the skin, and remains in place without causing any harm for several days, then the method of pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is very deeply embedded and cannot be removed, then apply tar as I have told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is placed back in the body but cannot be seen, then cover it with the entire tent.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable tool.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot pull it out due to the narrowness of the wound, and because the arrow is deeply embedded, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then leave it until the wound becomes large.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and retrieve the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrow that it holds, then break the char that is stuck on two parts to the muscle that you can, and then break or pierce the ears of the arrow, until you can retrieve it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully remove the arrow, so that you do not break the arrow when removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then pull the limb towards the shoulder, as the extraction is alleviated.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if blood flows from the wound, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put care as you can muscle to remove the arrow without danger, or soon or late, or firmly or weakly;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow left, as this is the greatest help that can be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it does not open anything of its own, or where the skin is inflamed in some place so that one can see or feel it apparantly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	then cut across, as much as the needles can take, and then extract it.
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, and expands the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	and if it cannot come out, then leave it and then restart the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if it is from an arrow and it is still in, if it is stuck at all;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if it is stuck in the flesh, and you see administer gently, if you administer the instrument straight, so that the arrowhead enters the hair of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	then pull out, and if the arrow is stuck, if you pull out the instrument at an angle, to alleviate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow is stuck in the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cover it over, if you can;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and guard yourself from covering the vein and artery, and then extract it, and then cut into the wound, if necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways to do this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	Great, medium, and small, depending on the amount of blood.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is like the beak of a bird, to stick at the point of the arrow, as in this way:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the barbs to hook and to hold is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins common to the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of the veins that are opened, there are 31, of which it has or head 16, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	2 beans that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the 2 arteries that are in the 2 temples appearing.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the 2 veins that are in the 2 arm pits of the 2 eyes, which are called "aspires".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is located in the forehead
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is located at the back of the head
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two temples that are located on the sides
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are located above the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augerich
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are outside the tongue
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly bled are five in each arm
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and is on the right side, and is called by the common people "vein of the head
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	And the common one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilar, and they call it the lay people "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	And the basilar is on the right side, and they call it the lay people "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossa, and it is that one from which one bleeds, which opens clearly above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the subclavian is the vein that is between the brachial and radial, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	And in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	The first is outside the pouch of the sinister side rib, and the second one is above the knee of the dexter side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	et the vein which is called «nesse», which is in the elbow of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins above those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The purging of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs, and migraine;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the purger, as I told you, and it is that you reset the head of the pain, and rub the limb where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then strain the pains on its neck to a ligature, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two loops depending from the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where you feel the bone out of your joint, and if you sense the pulsation from your joint, it is dislocated;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and place it outside the vein next to the bone, then lift your hand all around the vein, and cut and scrape the skin and the vein well, so that you can see through it twice;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strain and tie it until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already mentioned the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples, which is worth avoiding, and sodden, and accustomed to being covered with tears;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of a good surgeon are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and he knows his own neck, so that the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and he feels the hairs on the other's back, and then inspects it;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the skin over the vein at the back of your hand, and pierce it with a lancet from outside, and lift the vein upwards, and tie it off, as you have done in the other two veins, and draw out the blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the hairs, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put gauze over it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then the bandage is formed, and it is left until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken about them and their treatment and removal, as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the facial vein is as valuable as the healing of the cerebral diseases of the face, and migraine, and rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the pain is felt in twisting the neck, until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosser", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the point on the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the neck from its dislocation, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, the fire should not be too hot;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the iron should be straight, because the teeth are close, and by chance it may break the flame when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The use of the two veins that are in the two arms helps with the eyes, and the jaw, and the jawbone, and the cheek, and the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their vein is such that the pain dislocates its neck by twisting from any joint, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then, the healthy one, and let the health pass through the wound, a little long with the flame, a little wide, for there is no hair.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are too delicate, perhaps it will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then apply pressure to the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein from the neck is good against fever, and for sweating, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, and always when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the health is such that the pain strains its neck, then strain its neck to your right hand, and take the delicate flame long, and put it under the lip in the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well there, and the saint will begin to bleed now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not move too much in the meantime, and draw out the blood according to your need, then tie it up for a night, as it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And this is the shape of a flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The sainfoin of the second kind helps to narrow the aloe, and at the beginning of mesmerism, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and stomatitis;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	And the quality of the sainfoin is such that the diseases avoid its neck from one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the masters be above the head of the dislocated part, and the dislocated part below the seat, then gently lift the limb with a long, slightly wide, and then drain the blood frequently, as much as necessary for the matter.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then repeat on the other vein, then release the limb, and hold the veins steady, so that the dislocated part does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it rest until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips above helps in the mouth, and in the corruption of teeth, and fissures of lips, and soreness and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healing is to make the dislocated part sit in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	Then turn the eyelid, and look at the two veins, one on the right eyelid and the other on the left, which are known by their black color and by the small black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	Then cut both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, cut the largest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the tongue's disease
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The veins that are below the tongue help after the sainie of the cephalic, and it is at the narrowness of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of a good physician are that the hairs between your hands before the sun, and the tongue is relieved, and look down each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	therefore healthy both and not move too far away, for from there are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins that are commonly cured are cured in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by pressing all the fire wide, or by oil-like, as if cutting through, and is called "anesel";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the fire cautery is very famous, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open veins that have been sewn closed with thick blood that is clotted and disturbed;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of a flaming torch:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicate and pointed, and is for opening veins that are delicate, where there is delicate clotted blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and where the collarbone, and where the shoulder, and where the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it is necessary for the vein to be opened carefully, and that it be separated from the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and blood clots come out, then it is necessary to cool it as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it should not be pricking the fire, but cutting as with a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilisk does not open clearly, then it is necessary to restrain and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you want any blood from it, or you clean in its place the vein with your arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the copper to the fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you see that you know the vein of the sinew, then it is necessary to restrain the arm and touch the vein until you know the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then signal the elbow, and then tie the arm, and cover the wound with a flame afterward.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and watch that you do not pierce into the artery when you see the elbow swell, for it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	then move away from it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it spouting out as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, then it is not from the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then quickly move away from it, and put your finger on the length of it, then remove your finger when it is not stained, as it often does.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	tie the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the hairs;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is fear, do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	and if the pain is not alleviated, and it hurts, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it is open, for the main part of the remedy is to stop the bleeding;
et estainche li sans.	and relieve the pain.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	Take a piece of cloth, and cut it, and take one part and tie it well to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the pain is relieved, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then the doctor, as we have said, applies powders that stop bleeding.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stoppage is not always effective in many positions of the small wound of the limb, and the position of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The cleaning of the vein in the middle helps because it treats blood from the top and the body, as it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the cleaner to move for the vein that is outside, and if not too far from the front, and he finds the vein, and it swells and the santez is not stopped.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve is often open, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you must use the instrument accordingly.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	shield the nerve from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has veins between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The remedy for the cerebral headache helps, that it draws blood from the head, and helps with the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is recommended to use the remedy by applying a garlic or mint oil fire, because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not affect any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is recommended to use the lighter limb, and do not harm anything if it does not work the first time, and then start again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And by chance, some men's arms swell to others, but it does not harm them the first time.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you need to know about healing is that healing is only intended for the purpose of maintaining health and preventing diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	And whether the healing is done in one of the three veins that are either open:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	That is to say, cephalic, fasciculic, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	And it should be healed at the beginning of the first hour, and in the afternoon and in the evening after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	And it should be cleansed on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The cleansing that is administered to diseases does not have a determined time, but it is best to do it in the morning or at night, every hour and at all times;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not necessary to cleanse children under the age of fourteen, nor a pregnant woman except for the first three months after conception.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Do not let those who have passed sixty years old become physicians.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wants to cleanse, in whatever way it is done, it is necessary that he empty the intestines of a light enema, if he has much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous waste harmful to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	Do not trust those who are too fond of meats, nor those who are overfed, so much that they are full of humors;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one becomes ill after colic, vomiting, diarrhea, and frequent menstruation, and of living with a woman, and of travel, and of watching and fasting, and all the virtue, or by any other cause of the arm or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly remove the humors, if they are not too thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter or take a bath, if nothing prevents, to subtly remove the blood, and save the vein from the third hour, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself from that day of work, and point, and luxury, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be bound and joyful, and let the physicians be higher than those who heal, and friction the arm II or III times, then restrain the joint above slight movement, for if it is too stiff or weak, it cannot correct itself;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then friction the limb with hands, until the veins swell, and feel them to be full;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then milk the physicians the flame of a small amount of old oil, then place their thumb on the vein nearest to the limb where they want to heal, that the vein does not burst and fail to heal;
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Because there are veins that flee as quickly as strings to the surgeon, and some that are plain of thinness, so that when one puts above the flame, it withdraws from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	And if the surgeon opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because it is necessary that the surgeon be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the first time he opens the vein, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	But if not, he should restart a little below that vein or above carefully, if the vein is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the joint is inflamed, and the pain subsides, leave it for one or two days, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	by chance it may come abscesses.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter or bathe, then restart the cleaning if it suits him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or you rub it gently and doubt that it will not bleed as much as you saw, then trust that wound itself directly to all the fire.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work it gently, if the joint is inflamed.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the limb swelling, do not start again with the same salve, and put on a little oil, for it soothes the blood in the wound, and is better in this limb than the salve.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	And thus administer the oil salve in each wound that you cleanse the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	And this very thing makes a triangle and a bow of the herb, when it is put on the limb.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If subtly draw out the wound and separate it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if some large abscesses come, which often happen, exactly when it is not cleaned except at this time or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the limb sponge moist in hot water and a little salt, and hold it an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place for some time without any discoloration or greenish tint, then it is not harmful.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place on top of anything with aloe or mustard mixed with honey, ointment, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the pus from the church.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	and therefore place your hand on top, and if you feel the swelling soft with the pressure of your hand, then it is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore do not place anything that we have said on top, because by chance without the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply a dry bandage to strengthen the joint, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And apply each bleeding according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is not black, let it remain out until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it swollen, let it remain out until it becomes thinned.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is suitable for one who is lame and disabled, and has the skill of arrow extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let him heal quickly and often, and it should be treated by cutting across, not by pinching.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This method of healing is safe from the corrosion of blood and the straining of tendons, and it is better than healing by a long or wide wound.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to those who have a bleeding wound, it is appropriate to give bread mush in the juice of green apples.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is hot-blooded, then apply blood three times or four times. And if it is of cold complexion, then before the healing give bread mush in muscat syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strong-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he has a fever after the evacuation of much blood, it is necessary to give him a broth of meat, and an odorous syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter or section on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to drain some arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by much bleeding, he should do so little by little, according to the quantity of its power continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wishes to drain some arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong pulse, he should bleed again seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And those who wish to heal on another side, they must heal at the second hour or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	Because he has much blood within his body that is already heated, and causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw a large amount, and widen the vein until it pierces into the flesh.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you should meet all conditions of health, and place your hand on the wound as it heals, so that the patient does not die from bleeding, which has often happened when the healer is negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not draw when you see the arm weakening, and make blood flow out a second time, and the vein is closed, that you press strongly on.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If it is curved, he should extend his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it rest until it heals the second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you do not point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that is frozen from the vein is softened, and put on a cloth soaked in oil, and press it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the pus is seen to be flowing, let it flow and do not press it, until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood the second time, draw it from the same vein, or another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are sound because they are composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of healing is that the hairs bring their hand in sharp hot, until the pain is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then tie it gently, so that the vein appears well, then heal it across, not too narrow or too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And let the pores be wide, and clean well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it is already in this state, do not turn the hand again in hot water, for it is put more in ice than in hot water.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bleeding of the wrist vein on the right side is worth for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Strain the hand, and apply hot and sharp, until the vein is punctured, if possible.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	And if the vein is crossed, and if you manage to catch it all at once, without causing any harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	And do not move too much in the beginning, for the veins are all over the body, and then put the hand back in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary, if you put oil and thread over the vein to sew quickly, and thus do for each rain.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the hand on the right side is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you to the left.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve for the breast is good for all diseases that are not of the body, such as diseases of the marsh, and retention of flowers, and disease of the rain, and of the coxes and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its blood is such that the hairs boil in hot water, and rub on the vein until it stops, and tie above the joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the elbow, and from above the wrist there are many raindrops;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then use the larger rain, or at the elbow, which is more suitable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you use it above the wrist, then guard against the nerves that are displaced, and apply it as if in scraping.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be equal.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the sinew, then reset the knee in the high position, and let the vein fully drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the first application does not work, then start again from above a little, because the veins are salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	and do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus apply the same soporific to the other wrist.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the knee of the thigh, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is for an arrow wound.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his health is such that the hairs between or in the bath, and strange above the ankle four times in twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then the healthy one in all ways that you can, and across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worthwhile to cover it, because the limbs are sore, and it is very painful for men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not relieve it, then the healthy one of any that opens or falls from a piece of cloth, and towards the small toe, and it keeps the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make so much correction of the blood that you see, and then release the ligament, and put on cotton and hold it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of wounds by suction
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuum devices are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	And suction is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	Either it is at all heat, or without heat;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	And the suction done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is entirely at the top of the chest;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the others are at the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others in the second rib of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction from the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction from the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction from the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction from the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction from the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction from the two knees;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the body, and for this reason it does not weaken anyone, as is done with venipuncture.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered except in cases of extreme heat or cold, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if necessary for illnesses, it is advisable to ventilate, or by custom, to uncover each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every ten days.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are some who, when they have the task of ventilating, have heavy heads;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and some who feel pressure and redness in their face, head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have extended their tongue, and spit blood.
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and some who faint, and see black spots and pale faces and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is at the end of the month, we command them to fast for three hours after midday.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saliva of the mouth helps to ease the pain of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should only be after the evacuation of all the blood from the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventilation is in place of the saliva of the head, and it should only be used by those of cold constitution or who have diarrhea, as this does great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for this reason it should not be used by those who are watchful or who have cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves, if they become forgetful, and for this reason, it is necessary to place the vacuum a little lower due to the uncertainty of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the neck is in place of the saliva of the head and the basilicon, and because it is good for the narrowing of the throat, and for the opening of the pomegranate, and for all, and for replenishment.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And it should not be placed too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it will cause the spine or stomach and heart to twist.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The ventilation of the second costal cartilage of the neck alleviates head pain, obtunds and eliminates migraines, prevents strangulation, and relieves pain in the roots of the teeth, and is in the place of the health of the basilica;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is necessary to command the healer that he press his hand when placing it, so that he does not compress the artery, and does not cause bleeding of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The ventilation of the lower jaw relieves mouth disease, and decay of teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the joint of the second lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is for diseases that come from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The incisions of the shoulders are just as valuable as three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And the healer instructs the patient not to fear too much pain, for the bones are bare of flesh, and can be seen through nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The suction cup placed on the back is just as valuable for drawing out morbid matter from the foundation, and for diseases that are not visible, and it should be large and made of metal, so it can effectively draw.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And by chance, if it is too thin, it will break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The bandages of the legs open wounds widely, for they draw out blood from all over the body, and cause ancient pains of rain, and of marsh, and of the bladder, and remove the flowers.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are in the place of the second phalanges, and of the second metatarsals, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause pain in many positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to put the bandage is that you first place it empty, and suck quickly, and apply firmly, and move evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the affected part red and swollen, and open the wound of the blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then apply heat, and replace the bandages, and take care of the body's position, for there are some who have sores and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to make a single cut, and it is necessary to make large wounds and deep ones;
et suce legierement.	and clean lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the wound is not large, then it is necessary to make two cuts:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the wound is not very deep, then it is necessary to make the third cut;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw out the blood a little and a little, then we should only clean once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want much blood, then we recommend often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is not let out, then we apply heat, and the end is that the wound should be cleaned thoroughly, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are tough, and who have hard pores, that you use the legs of the oil suction cups, which are appetizing and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of oil violet, or of almond sweet oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the ivy state, of lettuce oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if that person who is to have a wide and large opening, should not put any oil, but it should be washed after venting with hot rosewater, or hot cold water, or water of elderflower, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from the ashes of silphium, or hot water of mint, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have excessive flesh rise from old wine, or from sour wine, or from the decoction of anise or chamomile, or from other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and they should not immediately apply suction after the bath, but an hour or two afterwards;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and they should not sleep immediately after the suction, and it is good that they warm themselves, when they should be sucked and when they are sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And if those who are suctioned are cold, and if they are not enough and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is good that they take cold things, such as large apples and endives and lettuces at the mouth, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and put on poultices, and bread of mustard, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and put on poultices, and poultices of mustard, and moist meats; and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day that he will move around, he should drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is appropriate to give some men ginger or muscat wine before or after movement, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And let them subtly give the water, but it is not appropriate for everyone to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are placed to cause pain are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagra, and on the belly and the buttocks and the legs and the thighs, because these members do not suffer pain in those places, and no one does it except to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the baby is born;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to overcome the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the buttocks to ease the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is a bone or stone, by its attractive power perhaps removing the bone, or dislodging the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus she does when placed over the liver and over the stomach when there is wind retention, and these vacuums are administered empty for suction only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and never administered together with fire, and sometimes plain hot tea, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the vacuum with hot boiling water, or hot water in which he has cooked poisonous herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the pneumatic administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two large and half-palm-wide openings and is surrounded by a small perforation, just like to put a needle, and if it is of tin, sulfur before so that it does not burn the pain when placing it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the middle of it, a rod of iron or wood, to put a splint, and they are both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups of children are different from the old, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should put this suction cup on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	with a wax splint or linen, and put it in the suction cup at the end of the rod that is in the suction cup, so that it clears both the back and front of the suction cup that it does not burn the hairs.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	And then place it on the limb, and you should put it on the perforation that we have said, so that when one wants, it goes through the vapor, and one removes the suction.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And grasp the line as before, and restart it often, if you have skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction that is administered in disease of pleurisy, at all acute, does not have a probe or perforation, and is not administered until it is full of acute, and is placed on the limb alone.
et c’est li forme:	And this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Noses are not administered until in limbs where one cannot place suction for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and when removing a horse's shoe, as with two or three nails, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is such that when you cut through them without any obstruction, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in fresh water, as long as they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then clean them with blood and a syringe, then rub the limb until it is red, and place the nails on top.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat and ready, if it is possible to put a syringe there, place it, as it is very useful afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the arm gently, first from the shoulder, then from the elbow, very well, and then wipe it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if it is too sore after the course of the sinews, then rub the linen cloth in cold water, and put on it, until the wound is cleansed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wounds multiply, then put on it broken glass, or salt, and similar things, until it is cleansed.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put half of the crushed beans on the arm, and leave them until they dry on the arm, it will stop now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more serious cases, take other remedies.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the remedies do not want to take effect, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you make a needle until it enters the wound, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will stick.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they are biting, powder them with a little aloe and ground silk, or ash, they will now bite.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Listen, foolish child, that the evil fate may not befall this chapter, that they have never seen any of the ancient books, nor lettered them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the knowledge of this art is lacking in our land, for I have not found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	And I know nothing of it, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that will be brought, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the wise man places his understanding, and delay over the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or wound comes to any one, it is necessary for you to quickly clean the dirty part on one side and on the other, if nothing stops you, such as weakness of body, or children, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	when he does not hold him tightly or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and uses cold charcoal, that is to say, cooling juices, and oil of eye and of cartilage, and does not drink wine, and does not use any heavy meats, and does not fill himself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess forming, or spreading of matter to the member;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the pain returns again under his former management that he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a moistening remedy that causes swelling, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and beans, and piez, and fish, and wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the moistening remedy may cause pain and more quickly the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the old and infirm cannot be well put back together or healed according to their nature because of the corruption of the members, nor also those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but do not care, reset it over the broken bone and large thick rods that support and join the limb together, as long as it holds as it did before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not touch it at all in its work, and because it needs to be fed with large amounts of food, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And there are various ways to break bones in many different manners.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the breaking of the shoulder is different from the breaking of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes through the arm, and another in soaking, like the tip of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break all in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in every way it has its intention, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its joint;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known the breaking of the bone because the joint is twisted, and open widely by default, and its at the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting at the joint, and the limb does not feel great pain, there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can still have twisting, or a wound, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You should not move it by hand, but put on the remedies that come after, and then gently hold it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And if the fracture that goes through the arm, and both parts are disjointed, then you must now set them evenly, as well as abscesses which come.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come, if you leave no pus, until the abscess is soothed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it evenly in the muscle that you can lightly and safely, and if the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then reset it as it should be done afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if it is a bone broken into pieces, then reset it in two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or at your hand if it is small members, or at two strings, or at one string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken bone are aligned, then reset all the additions in their places with care that by your work no injury or pain comes.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and well support the two bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And if it feels good to the hand when it seems not to be quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it is stretched well and not restrained too much, and does not press as those who bring it through their work abscess and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, well restrain the bad that it does not move, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the limb is so assured that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not quite in place, and the limb should be placed in proper position so that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and ensure it is set correctly, as twisting can occur when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The qualities of the member broken are different in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small members, such as bones and fingers and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so it is appropriate to wrap them in soft and thin linen cloths;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as the ribs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so it is appropriate to wrap them in a wide and sturdy bandage, because the large limbs envelop the whole member, and they hold it equally from all parts, so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then lightly lifts the limbs, three or four times according to the limb, and holds the hand a little at every joint, then goes above the fracture and holds it less, than the fracture is gradually moved away.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and gradually softens the limb a little and a little, until you grip a large part of the healthy limb, then take another limb and return around directly above the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part away from the fracture, and holds it gently, not too hard or too forcefully, as we have said in the first section above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the limbs wet linen or cloths, until they are evenly aligned, then tie everything together with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or an abscess, then place something soothing on top of the abscess, and what removes the inflammation, and leave it like that for some time.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain over your splints, and they should be half of a wide bandage, or of buckskin that is properly cut, or of palm leaves, and they should be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the nail that one puts over the break be a little bigger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should also be as long as it needs to be for the limb of small or great size;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then stretched over the nails as you have done in the first layer, then tied with a thread evenly, as in the first layer over the broken part;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	the tighter it is, the less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it should be that the thread is medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, like what I have seen in the works of those who make laces with linen ropes, and that is great error, because the layer cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should only have between each nail about two finger widths of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the needles of the stitches after straightening them in their places, put some discharge of linen or other clean cloth, so that it does not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splint, and the bandages are broken, I will tell you the treatment later.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And it is not necessary to straighten all the broken bones on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	When the limbs are large, it is not necessary to put stitches immediately, but after five days or seven, or more depending on the safety of preventing an abscess from forming.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and here is the method of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and you take flour that is kept in the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and use this mixture, which is not too clear or too thick, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring fractures to many positions, and specifically to women and small children, for it is not too hard nor too soft.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way to apply plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take equal parts of beeswax, gum Arabic, resin, and pitch, and boil them together; then add mastic and frankincense, in the same proportion.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Add myrrh and aloe, in the same proportion.
alechil VIIII З.;	Add a little oil of lavender.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	Grind it into a powder and mix it with egg yolk.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the patient's complexion is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and it quickly heals broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of splinting that is useful for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take a cloth and soak it in cold water, then apply it to the affected area.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mix equal parts of honey and aloe vera, then apply it to the affected area.
acaice VI З.;	Apply a cold compress to the affected area for six minutes.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Grind ten grams of bole armencian and mix it with either vinegar or an equal amount of egg yolk, then apply it to the affected area.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another method of splinting for joints and bones that have been dislocated from their sockets, and to relieve the pain, and to support the weight of the bone, and to prevent further breakage.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take a new cloth, and soak it in oil and cooked lard, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These bandages do not heal immediately, but they are good for easing abscesses and properly treating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to set broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and earthworms, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat the healing of broken bones and to ease the remaining pain of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take valerian root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of each one in equal parts;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is hot, apply the mixture with fresh coriander juice or vinegar, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of applying the plaster more strongly than the first, when an abscess is resistant to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of wormwood, and seeds of linen, balm, melilot, and saffron, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and preserve with vinegar sharp or sweet, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it, for the reason that a cerote made of wax and oil was used, and nothing else, and he said that it should be between two things, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to treat wounds and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mallow and horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and wormwood, and silk equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it to the affected area.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then release it a little later, and be careful if the hairs do not feel any pain, nor has the bone of its joint moved;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if it does not move by itself after that.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the limb, or itching, whether at rest or swelling, then hurry, and release it, and apply the dressing now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take light bandage, and wet sponge with salt water, and immerse in hot, and lift the limb, until the itching stops, and ease the pain;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, boil in hot or rose oil, and tie with a bandage, until you are sure of no abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflamed member, and relieve the pain, then begin the subtle binding, and a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	as gently as it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is filled with pus and redness and pain and swelling, and you have the skill of plastering and bandaging, then treat it evenly as you did before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if the member does not come back to its place as we have said within three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it more than twenty days, according to what we see, until the breaker is healed and approaches the position of the char above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then the strain more than before, and it increases its flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb stiffer than is usual, it is not possible for numbness to come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then apply hot and sharp needles every time you remove it, and this should be done for each day, and release a little the ligament.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	then cut through the numbness in the limb, and change the position of the limb frequently as the foolish ones do, to relieve the pain.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is evil, and this work is not safe, and I see nothing else but fatigue and doing it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various methods of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many ways of breaking are, and various shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because it has breaks that are made by the percussion of a spear, and the collarbone is completely broken through to the shoulder blade which is outside the bone, as if it were broken or fractured;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and therefore this type of break is called "fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	or the spear pierces the bone from above and penetrates through it, and this type of break is called "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and this is the wound of these two breaks, which are either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is percussion from above, or a cut or from the fall of a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a broken bone that protrudes, which approaches the skin that is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is placed in the bone as delicately as a hair, and the fracture is small, and therefore this break is called "hairline";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made by being struck with an arrow, or falling, or by something similar, and allows the piece of bone to enter, and is fixed in place like the cauldron when it is placed on the cauldrons.
si entre li piere dedens.	if the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And there is more to those who have or wet bones, like that of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and they have in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are removed as these.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures by the withdrawal above them, and inquiry with tenting, and by the corrupted flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when the bone is exposed and rubbed with something, if there is an open fracture, it is black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, beware of bad accidents, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes coming out and reddening, and other similar things in many conditions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any obvious injury, and you hope for healing, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the broken bone comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day, so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the arm, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, provided that the skin around the bone is not decayed, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the cloth that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the broken part in this way:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you hold the head of the painful joint, and uncover it over the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when opening the bone, or an abscess forms, help it with what is necessary, and that you fill the joint with cloths moistened in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be sure of the opening of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to the two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	The one way is that you copy the narrow cut in front of it, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is that you have many different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are sharp and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in working lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the tooth is stuck and hard, it is necessary to drill around it, as you administer cuts with tapers, not piercing beyond the tooth's root, and it should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the tooth;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you should have several, so that each time it comes back into its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have marks for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways of marking:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you put one mark on the bone, and turn your fingers to both sides until you feel that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then put the mark on another part of the bone slightly later, and thus do all around, then cut the distance between the bones of the bone that is between the joints, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools you have such as pliers, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, it is advisable to reset the open part that remains of the bone with all other instruments similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if nothing remains of the small bones or scales, do not remove them lightly with any instrument.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is this one that the Gauls describe, which is safer;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the pain is very strong, and that is its word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must remove a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you can insert the lens-shaped piece of this surgical instrument into it:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one part, and it is the affected part in the second rib, so that the cutter is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	Then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly cut the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is attached to the bone, then lightly cut the bone, because one should not cut harmfully or without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone's fracture does not pierce through the skin, and the bone is only broken from above, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth out that roughness, and remove the scales with the delicate scraper that you should have various quantities of, to manage each limb according to its convenience, following the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use great scrapers first, and then more delicate ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-splitting and delicate cuts, it is necessary that you mitigate according to its advancement.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	And this is something that cannot be answered by one who has studied in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is discovered, then it is necessary to take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	Then take another piece of cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	And do this more gently than you can, so as not to aggravate the wound, then administer by pouring over another piece of cloth, and do not strain it unless it stains the wound only.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it remain there for one or two days until the abscess is soothed, then dislodge it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, frankincense powder, aristolochia, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make powders from these things, and put on the wound, and administer medicines such as mustard, without causing irritation;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is kept clean, do not leave any pus, and do not allow any pus to collect, for when pus collects on the brain's surface, it causes great harm;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	For when one places a sharp object above the wound, do not prick it from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take precaution then, for if no accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if no other remedy comes to hand except the one you have placed above it, then it is necessary that you apply a piece of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one cloth, and put it on top of the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the appropriate methods of treatment until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Be careful not to break both parts of the nose above, or one by itself, as there are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	And that one is cartilaginous and does not break easily, so it does not cause deformity or twisting, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	If one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bend your little finger or thumb into the break in your index finger, and set it inside the break until the finger regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, so that the pain does not increase because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nail, and cannot reach the finger to the bone, then it is necessary that you place it inside the head of a pin or needle, slightly larger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do the other side as well, and hurry to restore the first joint if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the abscess has subsided, then bend the tip of the finger towards the palm of the hand with pieces of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Where you put another bone, if the fracture is there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and they are so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no restorer should moisten the tents in the morning, and kill each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be ground in the making of an ointment with egg yolk and flour;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the bone, until the bone is iron and the cartilages are hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never use goose feathers in place of bones, and if the sore is wrapped, and the fracture is held, and blows the pain away.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess comes to the nose while you are working, put cotton or milled cloth soaked in red oil or a drop of iodine into it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if there are no abscesses, put on plaster made from mustard flour and powdered incense, mixed with honey, then place light bandages, and do not tie the nose tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the broken piece of the nose is small and in many pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments, then clean the wound, and care for the injured parts with charcoal and sutures, as appropriate for plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no wound in the nose, then treat with tents and apply cold compresses until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is fractured, and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is only slight, and not completely broken into two pieces, because of the teeth inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, to break your right index finger in the patient's mouth.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is in the left mandible, break your right index finger with the right hand, and gently break the fracture inside, and fix it with the other hand by default, and make even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the mandible is in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movements of the teeth occur, or breakage, then strain with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place above the broken jaw, and place on the double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the cloth a well-made large stick, or a piece of leather even and long according to the mandible, and tie it above the mouth that you can, and command the patient to rest, and feed him light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the position changes, then release it to the animal, and then put it back as it was changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And place a poultice on top, of powder from the mill with plenty of honey or flour of mustard, after you have removed the crust.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	And place another light poultice on top, and if the poultice becomes hard, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come to the face, then follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, do not apply any piece of the bone that is broken.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If it is applied too closely to the skin, it may cause infection.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, then expand it according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you have removed all these pieces, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, and it has been cleaned, then apply ointments to it, to draw out pus until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the bandage
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forearm breaks several times before, behind the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and displaced in two, and there are pieces, and it is the least heavy to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is fracture with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is that if the fracture is near the wound, you should have two assistants, so that one can hold the injured forearm that is broken;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the others stretch the neck towards the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then make the fracture even at both ends, so that it forms as it should, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have the skill to extend further, place a rounded, flat cloth or linen ball on the shoulder, as large as your need.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and pull the lever, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you make the fracture even as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder of the arm from behind, because it comes out in front, then it is necessary that the hairs of the armpit be pulled evenly over their surface, and the assistant holds the shoulder back, and pushes the shoulder down, until the bone of the arm is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	Then bring the fracture together at both ends, and if the bones are broken, it is necessary to cut through.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and get light pieces, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then use one of the knives you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put the forceps on this instrument to hold the gum:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it looks like a spoon, and is not fixed, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work:
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should have two prongs, like you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as is the edge of the wound that you made when you cut the bones:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of the abscess, cut the wound, and if the edge is small, or you doubt the abscess, then fill the wound with bandages and poultices according to its amount.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if it is an abscess that comes, then soak the bandage in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The setting of a bone, when it is in pain and when it is cut, is that you place above the bone the plaster from the mill powder and some egg, and put light dressings on, and place a sphere outside the wound, if you have skill.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	Then take a very large bandage of a palm's width, then place the cloth double above the dressings and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a thin splint of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	And place the splint on the fractured part, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and outside the wound, healthy and unhealthy.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the bone is broken evenly, and you clearly see that the dislocated joint does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the bones are aligned, hold them in place.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the dislocated joint rest on its back, and place the small splint below the joint to lift the dislocation up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the broken bone aligns with the shoulder alignment, or you tie the arm to the neck, and it does not dislocate for 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then reapply the plaster if you see that there is a need for it, and hold it in place until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored within 28 days, and less to some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	There are cases where the shoulder is broken or dislocated in the middle of the arm, and it does not stay in place except by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the splint according to the shape of the fracture, and the limb is realigned according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then apply the powder from the mill with an abundance of urine, and light bandages, and put it on top of the bandage.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then place a wide and thin spatula, slightly larger than the shoulder span, under the shoulder, and if it does not hold in any part of the shoulder, use a cloth of linen to support it evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then hold it firmly with a great bend, so that the spatula does not move from its place, and watch the joint each day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And every time it collapses, hold it firmly and if it is out of its place, support it evenly and grind the hairs on its ribs.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, if it dislocates, and you are sure, for it is not bone that can be put back forcefully.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is sticking out before, and not completely outside, then cut it off, and the bone, and do as we have said in the fracture of the forearm to alleviate an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the pinky
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The pain is never broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks at the back.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends outwards, and the patient feels great pain, and loss of all function, and possibly vomiting blood, and open the veins in the broken bone, and the patient feels well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the hairs grow out over their back, and the arrowhead is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and gather the ribs of both sides in your hands, and subtly put it back in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then place bandages and swabs above the thin skin of salt, or another light one, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	And turn the bandage around the back, and tighten it evenly, and rub the wound every hour, and if it dislocates again, tighten it.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	And if it is necessary to release it, for corrosion or for itching that comes to the limb, or pain or abscess, then hurry and release it, and change the bandage, and apply what has come from various methods of treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the splint, and hold it steady until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	That the rib fracturer comes only from great force after the back, and at the top of the chest, and does not fracture for any other reason than that they are brittle.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the pain is felt at the inquiry as it should be.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster and the bandage with a splint if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the rib fracture is inclined inward, it feels great pain and tenderness, as if of a wound, because the ribs do not knit together.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and there is a gap, and all the rest is filled with great blood, and it is a difficult healing, and the ancients had much concern.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it should be administered foods that cause the stomach to swell, to push the broken bone out of place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	Let us not do this, unless there is a case where it does not come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said of those who put suction cups on the limb, to draw out formally, and this is similar to reason;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	Nevertheless, doubt and the fact that the suction cup does not draw out the excess from the limb due to its weak position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that none of those who should cover the limb with wool smeared in oil high, and put tents between the ribs to equal the liquid inside, then heal the care of pleurisy, food, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the limb pains greatly that it cannot bear the weight of the bone which points to the sling, and doubt is at the limb, then it is necessary to cut across the limb from the broken side, and it is necessary to place a restraining instrument for the wound.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must drill the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with ointments, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses come out, put soft cloths soaked in red oil on the wound;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the wound as it is necessary for the abscess, and let it lie flat on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Never does a fracture of the neck bones come, and very little when it does rain;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you see whether they will be healthy or not, if you take note if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is often fatal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when you hold them and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the pains are healed, if you put care.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if a similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take note whether the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in hand are present, and there is movement on the back and egestion without volition;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when placed on their back, they void involuntarily.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it lies on its back and wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	It is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if not treated properly.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, it is the lighter of the two.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you should rub it with red wine or egg yolk oil until it is calmed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone is dislocated, it must be covered with a bandage;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and break the bone, then gather the two edges of the wound, if it is large, at a seam, then apply the healing ointment with charcoal, as long as they are clean.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone is broken, which is called the "bone of the elbow", then take your right hand and place it on the other hand at your wrist, then apply the plaster and the bandage above, if you have the skill.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then strap it, and if there is bone decay, then above, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is clean.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, it is not from a slight blow to the head;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and if they are broken, they extend long and decline to the spine, causing great pain, swelling, and bruising at the site of the break.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over, as high as you can above the broken rib;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and carefully examine where the break and the shape of the bone are.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only at the top, then align it with the natural shape of the bone.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long and it declines inwards, place the limb above its belly until the restoration of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have put it back in place, apply the ointment, then apply a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the broken part still so it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and place the limb outside the ribs, until the joint is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if it swells and hurts, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and apply what we have already said.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then proceed with the treatment, and hold it in place as necessary, unless there is no bad consequence.
et c’est li maniere.	And that is how to do it.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder joint fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The assistants are those located between the neck and the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, one should restore them according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one is that you take a single thick needle, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	and tie the two ends together, and let them rise up, and cut the painful part above the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then pour the broken arm over the needle, until it reaches ease, and has half an inch of needle, then let it go over any heavy thing or the nurse extends it down;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then put the broken piece of bone together with your hands, until the broken piece returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one pricks the sore above its base, and places the hand on his collar, then commands two ministers to prick the vein that is above the breaker at his hands, and the others prick everywhere around it, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the eye away from the breaker, above the breaker, and stretch each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the fractured bone is close to the top of the shoulder, it is necessary to put a median line of splints on one side of the shoulder, and the other towards the back, away from the fracture.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	Similarly, if the fractured bone is towards the back, it is necessary to put a light line of splints slightly downwards until the fracture is aligned with the shoulder and the back.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then align the fracture as it should be, and hold it steady, if there are no abscesses that come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if there are abscesses that come, do not hold it steady for the next seven days, and put on a soft bandage in oil and rosemary, until the abscess is soothed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then the strain, and the method of straining is that you place the splint on the fractured part, then bring the arm up with the aid, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the bandage, and strain with the aid, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a stronger and wider splint than the others, and have between each splint two inches of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture three fingers from each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then strain them over the stones, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less when moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the sitting of the stones and the pressure, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is healed, leave it to lie for seven days, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then look at each three days the joint, that the itching does not spread and come to the limb, or the inflammations do not come to the limb because it is too stiff.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, it should not be removed until after three days or more, and the pain should lie on his back, and he should have his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and apply a bandage to the dislocation in a plain cloth equally, and look every hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken member does not move, or that the tendons are not softened;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if the pain is reduced by the power of medicine, and give him the meat that we have put before, in such a way that the meat is at the first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when he begins to eat again, it should be soft.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days of the injury.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then one should apply poultices and give baths to the limb to promote healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	If its structure is crooked and swollen, it may take forty days or two months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "humerus", one of which is smaller and is the one that forms the elbow joint.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	And the other is large and is the one that is outside, next to the small one.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Possibly the larger humerus or the smaller one is broken alone, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the smaller humerus is broken, the recovery and healing are easy.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large bones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If the small bones are broken alone, then it is best to slightly extend and align them.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is a large fracture, then it must be pulled more forcefully.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	And extend it up to the cushion of the hand, and the small fingers higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and the thumbs cross over themselves, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the fingers do not suffer any labor.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	Then extend the ministers of the arm to the part outside of his hand, or to the elbow, and others to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then put the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is no need to hold the bone in place, and you cannot restore it to its original position, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the bone breaker there is a wound, I have spoken about it to the chapter scribe;
si pren la cure.	if you take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, then glue the cloth of a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie the cloth by lifting it slightly, until the abscesses are relieved.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	Then remove the poultice, and put on the plaster of the powder from the mill with abundant honey, then place the splints, and let the splint of the bone breaker stick out more, and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and make sure he has six or more arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracturer is in one of the bones or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and holds it above the fracturer and keeps pulling, as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are on the fracturer be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread that is being pulled be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the member and the limb after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you should raise the limb in hot water, until those itches are calmed;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	Let the limb remain at ease and not be constricted.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then continue the strapping, and if the joint is dislocated and the bones are displaced, similarly, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the tendons cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, then you must slacken it slightly, and let it rest for some time, until the tendons are corrected, and then strap it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	If none of these things we have said come to harm, it will not be necessary to look at them for twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or ask them to lean back, then place their hands on their neck, and keep their neck even, and avoid movement and disturbance, and sleep on their back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And wash that fracture in 30 days or 50 days, and perhaps in 20 days, depending on the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breakage of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Then let it be at the back of the hand and we have few breakages, and only bleeding many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the bone of the hand is broken or crushed, it is necessary that the hairs be cut short and evenly, and be straight in front of him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	Then place his hand on the extended board, and extend the bones that are broken, and put them evenly in the bones, until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	And apply the plaster and cloths, if there are no abscesses, then put an ointment according to the amount of the limb.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the fractured bone is in the arch of the foot, then make a roll of cloth, and instruct the patient to bend it against his broken foot.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then strain it with a long cloth, and let the ointment be as large as the sole of the hand, and apply it as needed.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below the wrist, so that the hand is open and straight, then wrap the entire arm around the hand, and bind the injured part between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the fractured bone comes to any of the above joints, if it is the wrist, then put it evenly, as needed.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and hold it with a plant, and if you see that you put a straight small stake to lift the broken piece, and do not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the broken piece is like the others, such as in the index or another one, if it is aligned, and tie it with the healthy joint that comes after.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all by holding them, as long as they are worth, or you put a stake on top, such as a pouch.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and disposition of abscesses, and treat what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The teeth of the jaw are often broken, and well seen when it turns in front and behind.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is when one side of the bone above the fracture is connected to the other side below the fracture.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the broken bones are then arranged on their face, and each of the attendants stretches out their ligament to their equal part.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and it is when the fracture is put back into the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the chest, then one of the lines should be towards the base of the rib, and the other lines away from the fractured rib.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is close to the knee, and then the ligaments above the knee are stretched out, and the extension below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then put the splint on the bone with both hands, as it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, if there are no abscesses.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	If there is an abscess, let it calm down first, then return to your work and care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The litter is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap the fractured bone with a bandage doubled in two or three layers, and let the excess hang down, then bend the leg until the toes reach the root of the heel, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread upwards.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	Then bend over the leg and the thigh, then place the splint on the fractured bone, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then place the cloth that is soft between the leg and the thigh to equalize the pressure, then begin to bandage firmly three or four times above the fracture.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go higher than the fracture, and less the pressure.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take two threads that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and bind three stitches that are above, then return to the outside at the top of the thread, until you come beyond the bone.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and the pressure, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if there is no abscess or swelling of any other kind.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if there is, then release it, and direct it to where it comes, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then remove them if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if they cannot be removed, then cut the limb and draw out the splinters.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never break the rib in such a way that these are inserted, as in the dislocation and shoulder.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, in this restoration, do not strike the hairs.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And wash the ribs when they are restored at the appropriate times, either a little sooner or a little later, according to the diversities of the conditions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the gentleman
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	It is said that in the road of the gentleman, there is little breakage, but it rains many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is not but a cut, or a puncture, and it has to all wounds, and without wound, and it feels very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done by putting back together what is broken until it can be put back together as much as possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	Then apply the ointment, and if you have skill, place a round bandage, and bind it as it should be, then warm up all the positions that we have mentioned in other broken things, such as abscesses and similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply what is necessary for each accident until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "canons" and the other "fibula".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And it breaks everything as it comes to the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm equally, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg returns from all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, it returns in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then it feels great pain, and one can see it well;
et torne desoz.	and it returns dislocated.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and make it equal, and tie the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but in any case, if the fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and the physician according to his skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that bind the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to the groin.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	Then wrap the two strips of cloth above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this point it should not be able to bend the leg to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	And no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is from the cloth, and put the leg to prevent movement, and properly made, one puts it in the break or where it is wounded.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and shake each leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the patient is healthy until healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of bones due to a fall
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but bones due to a fall never break and are only slightly displaced, and there is no injury in most cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if he has broken bones that are slightly protruding, and you see these bones overlapping each other, if you put pressure on the bone above the ground, as if it wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the place where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their original position;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then apply the plaster and soak it above, and put a small cushion under the belly of the bone, then tie it to the bone evenly, then wrap it with cloths and other things you have at hand.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the joint is released, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any of the two broken, restore them as we have said about the two bones of the hand.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	Then place the broken bone along its length, and it should be slightly wider, then put the petal of the herb I mentioned on top, and apply pressure evenly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	And if there are two or three or more broken bones, place a splint on each according to its quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and apply pressure from outside the petal.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And it should be placed on top of the back of the petal under the belly of the wound, so that it stains well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and treat each event as it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone in the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the jaw of a woman is broken, if it has been displaced, then enlarge it, then tilt it towards the back of the neck, and hold it in place from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the hollow of the jaw with cotton, and put in as much as it is full.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then raise the woman, and gradually lift her back, and then slowly remove the cotton until it reaches the entrance of the jaw, and then return the bone with the cotton.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, return it, and thus do this every seven hours or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	If she is restored, and if you see, take a birch-bark vessel, and tie a rope around it, and fill the whole vessel with urine in its natural state.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow through the rope until the vessel is emptied inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	The natural state will return to the broken place.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then it should be filled with cotton and left in this way for some time until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the tooth of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of a woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these broken bones are not hidden from him who puts his study and use to this book, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break means in many positions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	Therefore, listen then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the tooth, when it is broken, take a goose beak and push the tooth;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it with cloths around, and leave it three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has broken with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, if the remaining vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breaker in the same hour, or the next day, if pus does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus comes, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the pus is calm, and do not touch it on the next day or the fourth, for you will bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken teeth appear above the gum line, then it is necessary to carefully place them gently in your hands and extend them slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions are not provided to make your hands even, then bend the arm with this iron instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight inches of length, and its width according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because it is necessary for the mirror to take three or four, according to how much it has in each case of fracture treatment;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and it should be round and a little thick, so that it does not slip when compressing on the limb at your work, and it should be narrow behind, and wide in the middle in front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palainche", because it should be placed on the top of the head of the apparent bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and it is struck once, as much as it returns, and they should be evenly placed against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is slight, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone until the instruments have hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, with the help of an appropriate instrument, such as a saw or a chisel, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then file off what is remaining in the bone of hardness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	When the bone is returned, and the pain is great afterward, do not let it remain in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do this until it is in its place, then wipe the wound with black vinegar wine, and if it is still in place;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place anything on the wound or apply any other thing where there is oil, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover the dressing all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not squeezed with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	many times have done this foolish thing, and have caused the pain or death or corrosion of any part.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the fractures be softer and more pliable than the others.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	If the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no harmful event has occurred, as we have said, and if you alleviate pain to the limb, then it does not matter to put on these bandages.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	But wrap it around, instead of these bandages, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is discharging pus, remove what you have placed on top of the wound, and put healing ointment on it, such as Tetraflamron and similar ointments.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the member be aligned in such a way that the bow can move freely.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they continue to move too much, and it cannot be set back in place, but rather moves like a bow, because of small pieces of bone, then you must first clean the wound with a tent, and remove all those unwanted pieces that cause this pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the limb, or some other form of corruption, then you must treat it according to what is written in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and open above the limb, as the bones of the jaw or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not pull it out, for many times it causes death, but leave it until it heals.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Perhaps it will fall off after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	forcibly applying bandages
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often see after the health of the fractured bone, exactly where it is near the joint, and the ugly thing is to see the shape of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance cannot do its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take then, since it is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer styptics such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar things, so that you do not use any of these, or all together, and mix them with stypic wine or with abundant blood or with vinegar;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the nostrils, hold them tightly, and do not remove them from the hands for a long time.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	then dislocate it again, and start another one until the headache is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or hold tightly a piece of wet clay well-shaped;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	because the property of clay is that it removes all swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the dislocation has hardened like a stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut off the top layer and make the excess apparent;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you reset it with any tool until it is healed, and treat it until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is after the garment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and it remains afterwards with weak and fine members, there are many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is due to the fact that it was tied too tightly, and was not loosened as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bandages, and could not come to the bones of the member;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to the multitude of swelling;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, and not enough rest in its hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body supple, until the swelling is not multiplied in it;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and the assistant bathes, and gives joy and relief;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then puts clay on the limb, so that the clay attracts to the great swelling, and the heat often from high heat, until the swelling goes down in the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a deformed limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, it does not at all keep its natural work:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	if one does not believe the people who say that one should break the limb all at once, and many have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and it often causes great harm, and perhaps death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	Nevertheless, if the dislocations and torture are fresh, it is necessary that they be treated with hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked as follows: wormwood, roots, and meadowsweet, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the softening poultice, such as made with diluted honey, and take the mustard seed of wormwood, and cook it with chicken fat or sesame oil, and make a poultice from it.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take figs fat, and grind them with flour of coltsfoot, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is it necessary to apply continuous and prolonged pressure with wet hands to the dislocation.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And allow movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the twisting is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, if it is covered just above the bone, with a slight incision.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply a bandage and rest in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, it must now be returned towards the shoulder.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if it delays, if the joint swells, and perhaps if it is reset to the bone;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because then it does not matter that it moves at the time when it swells.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it brings pain and other aches.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	However, when it happens, if you make the dislocation straight, then let it be, until the abscesses are calmed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Then raise the limb with hot and oiled cloths, then gently realign it, and treat each limb as it would be treated in its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It often happens that the jaws are dislocated backwards, and the dislocation of both is in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are slightly pushed out of their place and somewhat softened.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated and hang down to the side, and the saliva from the mouth flows out that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and its tongue is wrapped with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns in many positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if she is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset her quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a way that the minister wipes the bad part of the head, and puts the mirror some close to one of her hands at the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be free, to make it even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and command the bad part to soften its mandibles, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And when the joint is evenly aligned, it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is difficult to reset, immediately if they are both mandibles together, then raise them with hot and oil, until they are reset lightly.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned evenly, and the jaw of the injury is well closed to soften, then place wet cloths made of a hardened mixture of red oil and wax on it, then lightly bandage it with moist bandages;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the injuries lie on their backs, and their heads be between two pillows, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to speak, but take light food until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	then gently clean what he wants lightly, and do not forcefully open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well cleaned and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	If the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour and are not converted back to their original shape, then there comes fever and sweating as usual, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then cut it off, as it is deadly;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often death occurs to those who have it, in seven days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot be removed from the side of the body without cutting into it and the surrounding tissue, and it is not reset once dislocated, and one can feel it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the hairs lie quietly on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the limb gently to your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the question of those who are next to the neck cannot evacuate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it ever resets itself, then reset it as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then place the poultice and bandage on it, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is returned to its place when it is reset from its joint.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	There are three ways in which the shoulder is not dislocated:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one is that it dislocates at the part of the shoulder blade on the outside;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the worst part;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance dislocates to the upper part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate much behind for the shoulder, and does not dislocate much inward for the joints;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates outwards towards the shoulder blade, especially to those who have little fat, for these it is difficult;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	to those who have enough fat, it goes straight and enters straight.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some people, percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with an abscess, and thinks it is dislocated by the bone.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	Therefore, you must first examine to be sure;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocations occur when they are turned towards the shoulder, and they differ between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their difference manifest.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and dislocated towards the armpit, the top of the shoulder, as if it were an elbow.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And it cannot move its arm to its side, nor move from any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And similarly, if it is dislocated above, if it is not hidden, for you will see it clearly in the armpit.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And this manner of dislocation is not only to be reset, when it is new, or the pain is severe.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the manner is that the ministrants lift the hand of the misaligned shoulder upwards, then places their fingers below the acromion process, and resets the joint upwards at the shoulder.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	And the ministrants lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then remove it.
si venra hastanment.	If it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said earlier, then it is necessary that the misaligned shoulder be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And the ministrants apply heat and moisture, as with a decoction of poppy, fenugreek, and melilot in hot water, and it is applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then ensure the misaligned parts are on their backs, and place a cloth evenly across their buttocks, not too soft or too hard, then place the patient's foot on the cloth, and gently lift the shoulder with virtue, and pull the misaligned part.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and other ministers wash the head of the misaligned part, so it does not move back.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	The shoulder is now completely healed, and if you see that it is reset in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and make sure that there is a person who is larger than the misaligned part;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be on the right side of the ribs, and bring the shoulder away from the misaligned part, and lift it up, so that the misaligned part hangs in the arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And other ministers draw the hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, it can be moved with anything heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is also reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And it is done by placing a long, thin stick in the ground, which the patient should hold as if it were a spear, and it should not be too thick or too sharp;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed outside the injury, but with a soft cloth above, and the hairs of the forearm should be stretched out along the length of the arm;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should be extended downwards in the other direction, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if she does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a bandage of two arms in width and four fingers in length, which has the head facing downwards to enter through the opening behind the shoulder, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie the head of the soft cloth, which is not the cause of the bad pain, then put it away from the shoulder with the pain;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend the arm over the long cloth, and tie the dislocation over the cloth, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm over one of the blades of a knife, and let it be extended with the hands down, and leave the body hanging on the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	The joint is now open.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is ready, in whatever way it is, then you must place a equal woolen ball away from the pain, then apply the poultice with flour from the mill, with incense and a little honey, over the whole shoulder and around, then remove the poultice away from the pain evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is best that he move slightly, until the limb is comfortable, as it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	Then move it again after three or four days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And if it is stiff and not made soft, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strong due to moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is placed in front or in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and cannot be raised above the arm, then cut or stretch or soften the nerve at the top of the shoulder.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And cut so that the joint never again dislocates in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that occurs by the side of the hip and the buttocks, or behind, is caused by an impulse and extension of the hands, and it is treated with another ointment.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the limb becomes swollen and moves slowly, then frequently apply the ointment until the swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Joints that are damaged at the shoulder return to their place and return.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	And it is dislocated from all parts, and even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repaired, as one can see and feel.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	It dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the misaligned ear with the healthy one, let the patient see clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is sawn off, and it cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as possible, because if it comes after the joint has moved, it would be painful to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	And by chance, it cannot be reset at all, even when it is in the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and may even cause death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the resetting, when it is possible to put it back, is that you extend your hand to your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and its arms are spread wide, and the hands on either side of the wrist, in and out, and press the joint at its base together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	If the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and holds the root of the palm of the hand which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and hold it with two assistants, so that it does not move during extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm from each side, then that you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the patient sees the joint at his hand, if there is no oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together, as much as it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put on a dry poultice with some egg, and hold it together, and let the arm against the bad side, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if its joint is firm in its place, release the bone and leave it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	And if you see that the joint does not hold well, restart the bandage and the bone, and leave it in this way for some time, until it is firmly placed.
puis le deslie.	Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if it feels gritty after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	Or place a thick woolen cloth on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then open it and put in the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	And when it pursues, rub the joint immediately, then put the limb back in place, and then give a warm bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And do this twice or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	And if you see, put above the wound a piece of warm, moist cloth with butter, and press it.
si revenra a sa disposition.	Then it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is easily dislocated, and its return is lighter than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it should be returned to its place immediately, in the same moment that it is dislocated, provided that the veins are inflated, or if there is an abscess forming.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And when bringing back the shoulder, you place your hand on the table, and extend the minister's hand, and the mirror places it evenly, so that he places his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must check if it is properly set.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then place the hand on the table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the practitioner places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply analgesic plasters and let it rest before trying again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back after some time, the joint will remain twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not apply force against the pain unless the hand is washed, and cannot hold anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then cut the tendons or the artery;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other method but to burn with cauterization through the skin, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is dislocated, place the poultice that we have mentioned above, then strain and leave it for three days, then remove and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no inflammation, then use hot vinegar, and rub it until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never reset the two fingers of the hand at each part, never at the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	therefore let the two fingers be, and push the dislocation into your pocket as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it to the part where it is disjointed;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and let him wait two days, then set it straight that day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and apply a bandage as we have said, and remove the splint the next day, and move it, and reapply the bandage.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is straight, and also do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	back pain from a dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, as the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the dislocation jumps out of its place without volition, and cannot be held, and many times the member is softened, or both shoulders or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the jaw moves at four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The cure is that you reward if the gilbositez comes from childhood.
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If there is no cure or healing until then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or from blows or similar things, the old methods of treatment by great words, or it does not have much benefit at all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilbosity that comes from the worst before, there is no skill or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes straight in the second rib, and one cannot cure it except by that proper one which comes from the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the wounds should be stretched over its face in one even leg, and have some strain away from him, so that he does not bleed.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put one bandage at the head in a firm way, and the other at the feet, and tie a bandage outside the wounds, and the other at the hips, and the other at the knees, and the other at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers seek the bonds, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two ties.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well tied, the rope as we have said, and the mirror places its palms on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a table of three long arms, and bend it away from the pain, and the hairs should be on the side, and push the head of the table away from the pain, then place the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and places the mirror its feet on the other head of the table, and presses well, until it returns to the place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it to the one who returns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And place two bandages at the head of the misaligned arm, and on the other side of the feet, and between each bandage, outwards and inwards, a length of palm.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each bandage one hole, where the twisted part corrects, and the bandages are firmly pressed against the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two bandages, have one bandage turning, along the direction of the twisted part, and have in the two turns two small bandages of a length of palm, to straighten the twisted part.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	Then tie the ligament that is among the tendons towards the neck of the shoulder, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other end, and each minister turns their tendon to all the limb, and the masters put the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put above the drying plaster with abundant sulfur, then the stoope, and then the steel of a tablet of three fingers in length, which prevents the shoulder from gangrene and the part of the spine healthy, then the ligament of a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle remedies of traction until they are healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes at the end of health, then one must administer remedies that are softening and soothing, with the aforementioned steel.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and one never administers a piece of lead, and it never appears in the back spine, and one is careful that this is not dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bones that open, which is why one should not have any presumption.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	It is known that the joints of the waist and the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joint of the waist is dislocated according to FOUR parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	downward and backward, and front and back.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more downward than before, and slightly dislocated in the front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation downward is such that when the crooked leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy ones, and cannot bend the knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the one that is on top inflamed with abscess, because the one who has the back comes down.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who comes after is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of the one who has in front are that he is well aligned with the completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	always, do not double the genu sens dolor, and if one wants to make it move, if it cannot go forward, and retains its urine, and swells the pain, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who comes after are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and the other leg is more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head is dislocated from the neck outside the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The return of this similar dislocation is that you wait for the dislocation to settle in its place, and it lasts according to its nature, if there is no treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it does not matter if it has pride.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in this case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, and extend it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	If by chance it returns, and there is no need for other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong ministration, and strongly extend the leg at two joints, or at one joint that is connected to the thigh.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	And other ministrations extend its hand above in a similar manner that it bites its hands from its shoulders, then strangle it with a soft rope connected to the neck.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	And other ministrations tie the head of the limb.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And extend above and below all at once, until the pain is lifted from the ground once and for all, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then you must put care to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is in the shoulder, then you must support the misaligned part on its chest, then put the arm over the root of the armpit, and the arm that is out of the socket, then extend the arm upwards towards the shoulder, and towards the neck;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then take other assistants to hold his arms, and grasp the large arm of the misaligned shoulder, and extend it behind in a proper form:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	if it returns to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary to tie the two affected feet together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two ankles, and let the affected leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	Then it should be hung from the top of a stick, and let the two arms hang down two feet long.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then command the assistant to grasp the neck of the chicken, and let another assistants hang with the affected one, who grasps the neck firmly, for the joint is now beginning to heal.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	When the dislocation is present, prick the hairs, as we have said in the case of gout, and stretch the joint properly above the affected leg, and also on the foot.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two bandages, one at the head and the other at the foot, then fold the bandage between the thighs over the affected area in shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And place wet cloths around it, so that it does not dry out, then stretch each bandage towards him, and the hand puts the dislocation evenly in his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the flat surface, and press it as we have described in the previous chapter, and cut off the hairs on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the affected leg firmly, as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and places the fingers in pain above the bad joint, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the chin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the shoulder, it does not need to be stretched downwards, nor lifted up towards the ground, but should be as it was when it was reset incorrectly before, as we have said about the position of the two shoulders;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and should be above its face, and the arm stretched as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be straight when the shoulders are stretched, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	Then, apply compresses to the elbows, and put on the ointment, and bind it with a bandage, so that it does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	And rest it for three days or four, then reset it, and put on the ointment.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	And if you see that they are even, then bind it again as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Then reset it, and make the limb move well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knees are dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	That is to say, from the inside and outside, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate again before.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if they cannot do so at the knee, then it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their face, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	Then take their thigh in your palms, and pull it between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the thigh well.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	And other assistants extend their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they can lightly bend their knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster on top, and heat the leg at the thigh for three or four hours, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work with the painful parts until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	If the limb is not properly aligned, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the back, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are never sprained and never fully dislocated, inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the joint is dislocated, and test first at the part where it is displaced:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the return is slight, and one should gently extend it to its hands when it is only slightly warmed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is displaced quickly, one should then make the joint straight, and hold it with one hand above the leg, above the knee;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then grab the bone with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, then extend it upwards, and strongly hit the bone upwards.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	Do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the bone;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	If it returns, it is good.
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	If not, start the work again, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	And if it cannot return thus, lay the limb on its back on the ground, and firmly fix one needle between its thighs, and wrap bandages around it, so that it does not bleed.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then the surgeons tie the wrist, and other surgeons extend the arm to its length or to the elbow, that they tie above the wrist.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each surgeon extends equally, and the splints are placed between the fingers to hold the dislocated finger when extending it.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then the surgeons place the splints evenly on the dislocated joint, and other surgeons tie the sound leg at the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it has not returned, apply the plaster and pour water over it, and let the bandage form, and tie the wrist to the leg, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligaments are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two or three days, and if its joints are not healed, strain it.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then reset it on the third or fourth day, and let it heal for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes before that time, then it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary to treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be extended, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any part of the body, it is necessary that you make the patient sit with the injured limb straight out or on a table, and put your hand on what opens up from these joints, then press firmly on your hand until it returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even and there is nothing open, put the back of your hand on a table at two fingers' breadth, then reset it firmly, and leave it for three days, then reset it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often times the pain kills:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if not very presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, do not be harsh:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, use calming methods for abscesses, and leave the pain in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health:
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the member to its place, as soon as the abscesses are gone:
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	When the limb is set, administer things that soothe abscesses and cleanse the wound, as it should be, with dry dressings.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	And if the dislocation is fractured, and small bones are crushed, then remove the bones, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	And guard against entering the path of fear, as I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and your body.
