O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Oh, most noble sons, I have completed this book which is the back of the science of medicine, filling it up together with its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is guarded in our region and is restricted from all things, it has perished the science and been lost, and there remains nothing but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and the minds are closed and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I can revive it together with the order of this treatment according to the way of exposure and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of cauterizing irons and other tools of the work with the assistance of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is appropriate for someone who undertakes this to study the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of all, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of veins, and the flow and movements of blood and its rest, and the source of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hippocrates says that with the left hand it is not very good, and with the right hand it is little; and equally in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, if they attempt to perform it, may make mistakes and harm people; thus I have often seen many of these who interfere with this science and abandon their own.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish woman who lanced an abscess of the neck or breast of a woman, and lanced the arteries of the neck; because so much blood issued out that the woman died between her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And another case treated a man of age, and the arrow was large; it carried away with it a piece of the intestine, and died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat it, and saw the position of the wound and the size of the arrow, and if they cut it, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where the Duke of our land took care of himself who had broken his leg, and with the breaker he got a wound; and the nurse in ignorance kept the fracture above the wound with splints for a long time, and did not let any salve on the wound, and so it ended; and he commanded that it not be moved; and so it remained until the leg was completely infected and the foot and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and he urged me to come to dislocate his leg; and when I heard it dislocated, it was in the countryside and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways of the corruption were already confirmed in the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading throughout the limb until the limb was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another way that would burst the abscess and become infected, and then inflame due to the evil of its lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a pus, when it is free from melancholic humor, does not need much if only touched with iron if it is not in the joint where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, you should know that work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is, where he has danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where he has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For why it is important that you guard yourself, so that the wicked may not speak evil of you if you take up your weapons in battle, and undertake your maladies firmly and steadfastly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to safety and are healed; and leave behind the contagious diseases of great sickness; and remove your weapons from what makes you doubtful, and be such that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen advises in some of his warnings: 'Do not take on the care of seriously ill patients unless you are called a wise man.'
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatment according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and about the materials of cauteries, and about everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and incising, and about wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and about similar things; and the chapters are ordered and about the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the highest to the lowest, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember the work, it is necessary that I mention the quality of the help and harm of each condition.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest and most subtle science and secret knowledge; and because of this, many wise people spoke about it and agreed on it; and I do not speak much about it, because I make it long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterization helps universally in all conditions where there is matter, whether the condition is hot with matter or dry without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry weather, they all agreed that the fire cauterization was great help; and the others said the opposite: that the fire cauterization was only helpful for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat or dryness; and those who said the opposite claimed that cauterization was great help for hot and dry diseases that come from people.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the hot fire, you cool the body.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any way, no one should interfere except those who have experienced it, and who know the chapter on cauteries from long use, and the diversity of men's constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the remedies and the space of time; for other constitutions we do not fear, specifically in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the patients gathered and agreed to the cauterization.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my sons, that cauterization with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and of greater benefit than cauterization with hot medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	The flesh is simple, and only comes to the member that is cooked, and does not harm other members unless it has a name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines come from one member to another by moving away, and bring diseases of the body to the affected member; and perhaps the evil flesh for its high cost and the goodness of its substance does not cause harm, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it has been above the truth of things; and because I do not like to speak at length, for I only want to give you the secret which is hidden or fire, and the quality of the work, how it destroys diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they should be done in what manner the cautery is to be made, and ask when seeking.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is beneficial in all times, because the harmful things that come from it are removed by the help of the cautery; and indeed, if the cautery is for necessary pain, not only for short-term but also for long-term, which cannot wait until the greatest harm comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, my son, like the foolish people; for the disease that is healed by cautery has no return; and they say it thus, but it is not so because cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is as good a medicine for its quick effect, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And another thing is that the disease comes not always according to the condition of the humor and the body of the disease and its power; and it is assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauteries are administered in him where he has little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of dense for the pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return much; but it is little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is seen; but they do not believe that cauteries work after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cauteries the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth it.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is important to understand that cauterization is a part of medicine, not merely according to the intentions of those who are misguided.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that a cauterizing instrument of gold is more effective than iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; and they said that the effects of cautery do not cause harm, but I have found that this is not true, as I have experienced it, and it can be seen in some people; and a cauterizing instrument of gold is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And in any case, when you heat the gold instrument, you should not be concerned about its color changing due to the heat, and it has been previously cooled; and if it is heated too much, they put it into the fire; and thus it has enough protection.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use the fire cautery that we have already prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you would order this chapter on the shoulders first, for it is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The oil cauterizer
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterizer is used for moisture and cold on the head, and it is done for two reasons: due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the shoulder to the ears, and for multiple symptoms and tooth pain, and throat pain, and for all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the hairs should be removed by medicinal solution, changing the skin III or IV times, according to the virtues and age and custom of the hair, so that it can bear it; and then repeat the head of the hair.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then let him sit cross-legged between your hands, and place his hands on top of the palm; after that, put the root of your thumb over the root of his nail between his two eyes; and where your fingers come together, if it bleeds from the center, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the bone in its socket with ink, and gently pull and stretch your hand little by little; then slowly release your hand, and reward the bone if you see the bone is small; and if you do not see it, then start the cauterization again until you see the bone as I have told you; after take a little rope, and put in warm and soft cotton inside, and place on the bone, and let it stay for three days; after put on a moist cloth in butter; and leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound called «tetrafarmaçon» until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old ones said, that the longer one stays with the wound open, the more it purges; and for this reason it helps to heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should cauterize the wound so much that a part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it is healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others said that one should cauterize the wound less strongly above, and put in as much as one removes from the bone as wide as the vermilion that women put in their hair to make the humors come out easily; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards it should be healed and sealed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me to be entirely good in all cases, except for those who have a fear of pain; and I think that I should leave it; because the affected parts are weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the affected part is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and milder for me, and from this use I operate in such cases.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the main
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in all cases the main pain comes with chronic pain that lasts a long time, one should use the affected parts and pills called "cochie", and purging of head and eyes and plasters; and if one does the cauterization that we have already mentioned, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care not to burn the patient with this cautery, as it is of a very hot nature, and not too quickly; therefore, apply it in a controlled manner as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the cautery to each of the horns of the head up to the bone, as we have mentioned before, and applying the cauterizing iron called "vassals"; and place the vacuum in the parts where you apply the suction; raise your hand so that you do not touch the bone: the pain from this cautery is much greater than from others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizing of the horns be more subtle than the one used to cauterize the middle of the head, and its form is:
dou cautere dou chief	For the fire cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When a sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the patient is purged by changing medicines, and the other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases do not help: then you must cauterize it in two ways, namely with medicine or fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with medicine is done by holding a hot iron and scraping off the skin and then applying it to the eye for a short time, and then making the temple in such a way that you can replace the iron outside the skin; and when it is replaced, hold it tightly and steadily for twelve hours; then remove it and treat it with a cotton swab soaked in honey for two or three days; then apply a poultice of bread soaked in warm water.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as they are healthy; and if you see that it is of some medicinal substances that I have written or prescribe to treat burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cauterization is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cauterization with this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a cloth or it has a small hook, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful part, and hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half of the hot substance is gone; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is before, and let out abundant blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing cotton on a sling around the limb for three days; then place moistened cotton on the wound, and cure the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this wound with the cauterizing iron called "cultellare", apply it at the point, and be careful not to cover the artery in this wound which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the wound
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the wound as we have mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterizing iron before mentioned does not cause much pain or heat, then it is necessary to extinguish the cauterizing iron called "cultellare" until it is white; and also place a line of half an inch of cloth on the limb, and take your hand once, and be careful not to cover the artery and that no blood comes out to the bone; and be careful of the mandible that does not move when turned, and the nerves have only sight of the moved and that spasm does not cause pain, and be careful of the bleeding of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting it causes great fear and immediately to that which is not known, and which is not studied and experienced; and leave the work in this way; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding of blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is mentioned in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	If you see that this fire cauterization does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is in pain, cauterize it with the head of the chief as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said or from the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterization that has two knives; and this fire cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and medicines have been applied and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pain does not move, then warm this cauterization called "poins", of which is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pricking all around the ear, where the pain is located on both sides, and moving away a little from the root of the ear until you have signed the earlobe; then apply X poins around each ear; after that, cure the earlobes as long as they are healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be cured by cauterization is only those that move from the mouth, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things that come from choking and spitting out blood.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you encounter this appearance of torture that prevents the flow of water from the ear and the mouth, and it does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize the pain with three cauteries: one at the base of the ear, and the other a little further from the temple, and the third in the corner of the mouth; and place the cautery in the part that opens healthily, and make the cauterization above a little behind the ear, and another in the temple as far as a pinch; and leave the cautery so high that half of the face is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it resembles the cauterizing tool that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it requires that the knife be a bit larger; after healing the wound as I have mentioned earlier, as long as they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is an old condition and you treat it as we have mentioned earlier, and it does not improve, and the pain does not have fever, then make four cauteries: two on the two corners of the head, and one on the forehead, and one on the back of the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have mentioned earlier.
de litargie	For laziness, do not delay in applying
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large and modified brains; then, after removing the entire head, place the mustard plaster on the occipital region, as written or described in the treatment of plasters; and this is the method of cauterization: if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus healthy, it is good; but if not, make three cauterizations on the head by descending towards the neck, and leave a space of one inch between each cauterization; and the cure is as with the others, and if you have seen that they are suffering, make one cauterization in the middle; and if the matter is, two more above the two horns, and the cure until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations be called "olivare" as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to clean the head of years and mucus that we have previously mentioned; after that, heat the head of the pain, then cauterize it and each horn, and behind and three times above the spine of the neck; and if you have more trouble, and the body is wet and the pains are suffering, and the disease is outside, if you do four cauterizations above the spine of the back; and let it be so long as the most helpful is arrived, and release your hand; after the cure until it is healed, and let the cauterizations that are called "olivare" that we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use cauterization except for those who are fleamatic, and it is first necessary to modify the brain of years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the injuries are great and suffer from painful medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot suffer, make them gargle and chew often with good meats; after that, let the head rest in the middle, and then apply cauterization as we have said before, and cauterize on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the injuries are far and painful, apply cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the pain is severe, then apply the delicate cauterization as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, there are excessive or corrupted moisture and large fluids, then use the cauterizing tool as we have mentioned for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy, the excessive or corrupted moisture is declining towards melancholy, and the wound is moist with the bad humor, then give it something to drink that cleanses the brain, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the wound; after making a good tortoise shell-shaped bandage, as a circle, and putting it on the head; and the pain decreases, and it is well held from all parts; present the liniment, and it should be mixed with old beeswax; and heat it gently over fire, so that the patient can bear it; then remove the circle from inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the wound every week once with good management until it is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	When you see the fire cautery being performed by making many pricks with the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the brain, and then places cotton soaked in butter and chicken grease on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the pain of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When pain comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient a bad thing mundifying the head, and keep it from all moisture, and make it sweat or bathe it many times with fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Then command the patient to turn his head, and perform the cauterization on the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples simultaneously, or if one descends from the pain is in one; and cover all the cautery with all the veins and arteries that are outside the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and keep from the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a sponge.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and in the incision, how to perform it; and never cauterize or heat anything outside the two lower bones.
dou cors des larmes	The path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins, or behind the arteries that are in the appearance of the main one; and it is seen that it is superfluous cold phlegm, then apply the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter: I cauterize the forehead, and II cauterize above the two temples, and II cauterize outside the two lower bones; and if there is more, then cauterize wisely above the sore with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine as we have mentioned in the previous section, and it does not work, then drink three doses of bad-tasting herbs; afterwards, the patient should be bled, and then cauterize or cauterize with a heated iron; and apply two cautery burns called «clavilis» above the two sores, a little outside the cheeks; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterizing of this cauterization, which is called "olive,
de coi ci est li forme:	is formed thus:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you have made two cauterizations on the two sorbips as long as they are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hairs that do not touch the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	It never happens that the hairs of the oil are converted to parchment, and they touch the oil, and then one makes two cauterizations according to two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then place the patient in a safe position; afterwards, draw a line above the hairs that is as equal as the outline of the wound, and as the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put cotton soaked in egg yolk and musk oil on top, then heat the cauterizing iron in the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have marked a little and not too many times, where the curse is located; and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper retreating, and the hairs raised to the point of the oil; then light your hand, and let it be so for three hours, then put moistened cotton on the burn until the blister is opened; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come back, and the paper is softened, then restart the cauterization on the same leg, as you did first; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and do not prick at the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The fire cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then take a piece of parchment in the shape of a mint leaf; then take French soap and live copper, one of each, and grind them together well; and apply it strongly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form you have made like the mint leaf, and put it on the paper of the eyes; and if the patient's disease is only in one eye, then open the other, and do the same; and put some cotton moistened with oil behind the ear; and the one who has the disease should be in a healthy state and show the medicine above, and press the poultice every time the patient feels the medicine biting, for it feels biting like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then take the medicine at your own discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the burn is healed, lift the limb from the pain, and if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then continue to apply the medicine on the limb or where the medicine has not worked, until your work is even and your eyes are steady; then put on a moistened cotton pad until the wound is cleaned, after which care the limb of the burn which is called «dyafenis» and others, until they are healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have the task to stay well in your work by great care that you do not cut into the medicine with those.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the oil, then start the medicine again on that one who is molded by the proper paper, as you did before; then cure until they are healed; and this is the form of the bandage of the dead:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And since the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to what you are constrained; and do not reply with the right way to that one who is studied in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not work, then it is necessary for you to cauterize them in this way.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Command the patient to place his head in your safe hands; and tie the bandage on his head between your hands in such a way that it does not move, nor does it dislodge his head; afterwards put cotton moistened with water or urine at the tip of the cauterizer: and heat the cauterizer which is near the head as if it were the form of a quill pen, similarly the one that is the cauterizer; if you see, if it is appointed from one head to the other, and if you see, if it is also like a tent; but all the same, this which is fastened is good for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula, it is opened and the pus is removed and dried; if it is closed, open it and remove the puss from outside; afterwards, apply the cautery hot and firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the neck above the oil, so that your hand does not burn; and apply the cautery in the oil grease, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just at the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again and if you have the skill, and leave it for three days; afterwards, apply moist cotton in butter, and the ointment of desiccating until it is healed, and if forty days pass before it is healed, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered; and the king according to what he would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a certain method of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	To the fistula, and the limb; after put in the wound a subtle powder of copper:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And they make of the quantity of a .З. of copper; and hold your hand firmly, and the hairs do not move, that the copper does not burn to its oil; and it is necessary to put above the oil on the hair cotton moistened with a few drops or in awe: the copper if the limb of the fistula, and the healthy by marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you must administer purgatives to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the center of the nose as it should be in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracked lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there are cracked lips that are called "hair", and also in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small cauterizing needle according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the patient in those cracks until he comes just before the event; after care, the broken bone is set as soon as it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the groin
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the groin or in the urethra, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and fermented and aged and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: therefore it is necessary that you use cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula; after plugging or puncturing the fistula, and holding your hand until the hot iron comes to the end of the limb, and behind the limb; and do so once or twice, then cure as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, it is necessary to expose the limb and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work, then place the hot iron in your healthy hand; after heating the cautery in a certain way as you would put a thorn on the tooth; and place the hot cautery deeply into the gums, holding your hand steady so that the pain feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth with salt water, and let the person rest for an hour.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in a similar manner, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gum softened by being held is hardened, and the moisture corrupted is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain from the teeth comes from coldness, or there is cold or wind, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from milk, and the tip in a iron or brass spoon; afterwards take cotton and wrap it over the point of a tent, and moisten it in hot butter, and put it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it is cooled; and thus do often enough until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that moistened wool and cotton in hot butter is put on the aching tooth, and put on the heated iron until the fire comes to the movement of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery should be made of fire that is such that you hold a hot iron or brass instrument, and it should be large enough that the heat does not reach the mouth of the wound; after heating the cautery, because the shape will come out later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be as great the same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the wound fills its mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then remove it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire cautery with the point you desire, and according to what you have available; and it is in the form of a cane:
des scrophules	of reeds
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the reeds are wet and cold, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cautery with two openings for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the cautery hot above the abscess once, or as often as it approaches the edge of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and place soft cotton moistened in butter on top until the burn is healed; after care with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the spine:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture prevails over the channels of the body, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary to first empty the hairs by medicines in solution; afterwards, apply cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn too much but with a small amount.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, apply another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauterizations that are called "clavicles" because of which we have the form in front; and cure the limb as we have described before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the mouth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of pormon are moisture cold, and the maladies have no fever or sweat, and is the ancient disease, then make two cauteries on the forceps in their sight; and the other cautery goes between the breasts; and let the cauteries which is called «clavile» according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, make cauteries by holding the whole cautery which is called «poins» because of the form that is above in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just thirty, or around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, the patient should be as follows:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, because you make three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, shave the hairs on their back and on their side; afterwards, relieve the pain in the tender part with your right hand; and if the joint is misaligned inside, heat the cauteries that have two needles as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound until it pierces just to the side, and bring four cauteries together with the cauterizing iron that has three needles; and for this reason, cauterization is done with the cauterizing iron that has three needles, because the shape of cauterization is these four needles; and they are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never place them above this one nerve because it has eight needles.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After place the cauterizing iron across with silk; after rest the wound, and do not move the limbs by length until it is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, it happens infrequently, then make the fire above the thick edge of the cauterizer, or many of the cauterizers in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and it is bound with moisture and is healed from the pain.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When cold and much moisture come to the stomach until it reaches its normal condition, and they multiply the diarrhea in him, and are customary ways of cures and he does not improve, then it is necessary that the pain be soothed above his back, and extends his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, perform three cautery burns after the scoop of the least amount by the quantity of one dou, to all the cautery clavile, and two cautery burns afterwards the two ribs until the figure of the cautery is at three angles, and has equal space between them so that they are not joined together as they will go through perforation; and let the cautery be so that it does not press the two parts of the chest, and let the figure of the cautery be according to this form without jostling:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see that the cautery is burning in the stomach according to this form; and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterizes by pinching and holding above the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you have seen of enche; then cauterize the whole cautery which is called «poins».
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the cure that we have had before, as long as they are healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes with pain from heat and moisture and great inflammation, as long as it is not removed from its natural condition by excess; and the pains are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help him much, then it is necessary that the pains be supported above his abdomen; and the sign of three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity over the liver, beyond the hypochondres, where the neck of the ox comes; and there should be space between each cauterization the thickness of a thumb; and let the cauterization be as long as the length of the body, and do not press much with your hand at all the cauterization; and let it rest only the half of the patient, and let the pains lie on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, and extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cuts with a heated instrument, if you are skilled and wise in the art, and you guard that you do not burn too much of the body, for you would make it stiffer all over; and that it does not come near boiling, for the flesh is very delicate there, and the wounds to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has an abscess in the liver, and you see whether it is in the flesh of the liver or in the mesh: if it is in the flesh, it does not hurt too much; and if it is in the mesh, it hurts greatly.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure is done, it is necessary that the hairs be shaved over his head; then sign the limb where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer which is similar to a thorn, of which this is the shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize with the cauterizer until the wound is healed, and it comes just to the skin, until the pus is all gone; after the cure according to the cure of wounds as long as they are clean; and it is not necessary that this cauterizer be used by anyone other than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore, it can be boldly attempted, and I believe that it is worthwhile to leave it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the fire cauterization
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use the root of aristolochia for cauterization with fire, and in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, and as thick and long as your finger; and crush it in oil, and take the cautery to the fire, and cauterize between the eyebrow and the collarbone, and two small cauteries a little down on the part that is outside the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the spine, declining a little behind; and one cautery in the middle, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the back, and one between the shoulders in front of the cautery that is between the shoulders. And do not press your hand, but do it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And they said that no man uses fire cauterization similar to the razor, and they scrape it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the abscess; and then the pain is gone, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear or the pain kills now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then they resort to three methods of cauterization that are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is a way in which you should make three or four cauteries, lining them along the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cauterizer that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on the entire cauterizer, and let the hairs be near its back; and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cauterizer that has two needles, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and relieve the pain where it comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you relieve the pain along the curve, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After boiling the two needles until the one on the other side is perceived to be hot, then remove the cauterizer, and thus in it will have four. And if you see, if it is cauterized with the entire cauterizer at three needles.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After healing when it has gotten pus due to long tension, and this is worth mentioning as another cure before mentioned.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cauterization is not useful for hydropsy, except in the manner which is called "ascites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one in the groin, and one behind the back on the spine, and one at the worst place; and let the cauterizations be very close to the skin.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the fire cauterization for the purpose of healing, do not neglect the care of the wound after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and together with the help of God, both intentions will be achieved.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cauterization for the abdomen is a clamp that we have shown before; and for the back, it is an oil lamp, as it has been placed before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen and have plain yellow spots, it is necessary to cauterize above the foot between the auricular and annular; and release your hand with the cauterization towards returning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply into the flesh, thus avoiding the danger of the knife, and let the cauteries be done in this manner:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making incisions above the two knees, apply two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the short knife; and let the cauteries be long, one on the front of the knee and the other on the back, inside the leg; and leave the cauteries hanging for a long time to cure the wound that has been made.
de la menoison	of the bandage
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly is cold and wet, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are blocked, and cannot be cured by other methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with great pain, then make a large cauterization above the stomach according to what has been said before about cauterizing the stomach, and circulate the cauterization; and four cauterizations around the belly, tightly tied, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	If you see the moisture abundant and the pain suffering, then make fire cauterization above the knuckle, and I cauterization above each rib, and II small cauterizations above the stomach below the great one, for the cure is beneficial when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of worms
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the worms are deeply rooted, or one or more, and are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, then make fire cauterizations: III above the spine of the back, which is all before unmelted little by little in triangular, and I cauterization outside the belly II doses; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and one sees the face swelling, then the face has I great cauterization above the stomach, as it is before said, and I other above the liver, and I other above the mouse at all the cauterization nail; and leave the cauterization open long.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, the limb when it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the cartilage that is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut through the cartilage, if the cauterizing iron seems like a razor, and then put it all on fire over the cartilage cut; and leave your hand so that the cauterizer comes to the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much cartilage, cauterize each part as we have said; after curing the wounds until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cauterizing iron above the cartilage, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the wounds cannot bear the incision or opening, we will tell you about it in its place, so that an illness comes that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When any fistula comes and is awakened and poured with pus and corrupted moisture, then you should prove to all a thin tent, and guard that you clean the tent as much as it has of porosity.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the cauterizing iron is heated to the point where it seems like a razor, and the cautery is inserted into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and you start again with the cauterization until those who are in there and corrupted are burned, once, or two, or three, depending on the amount of pain; and be careful not to burn the nerves which are inside, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the center of the bladder and intestine, you should avoid these things, and only do this in the case where it is necessary, and think that it is not yet cured; after curing the limb as long as it is healthy, and if the limbs are sewn, and the matters are removed slowly, then wash the limbs completely; and if the matters are not removed, sew the limbs and corrupt the bone at the font; and thus, like one of those that we will say in its limb.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the back comes from kidneys, and with great swelling, and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you cauterize the kidneys on both sides with the clavile cautery that we have already mentioned; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will be greater help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is small and weak from heat and moisture, so that the pain retains urine, then perform cauterization in the part before the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic region begin, and one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as a pin; and make another cauterization before the back, or two if you have need; and make the cauteries in the form of a cross as previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the marsh
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marsh is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and late in coming; and when they come, they cause great pain: then it is necessary to make three cautery around the womb, as we have said of cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations before the back; and make the cauteries in the form of a cross as we have said.
de la hainche	of the waist
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When viscous moisture descends to the waist bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the muscles of the buttocks are found to be separated, it is necessary that you cauterize the pain above the waist bone with a cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the belly around the waist as it turns, so that the waist is inside the circle; and if it is such a cauterization as has been done on the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, make three cauterizations on the belly large, and let the cauterizations be as before all the curatives; and the cure until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the evils are caused by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the evil of large humors with fetid pills, or other good-quality pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After the fomentation; and the manner of the cauterization is as follows: it is to say together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is in many ways, of which some are: that you cauterize above the hip joint three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and do good depth and great, and there should be between each cauterization a space of an inch, and it should be olive oil; never made or cauterized in the middle of the top of the hip, because there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, the cauterization with the cautery in the form of a circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but do it in a different way so that the circle contains the whole shoulder, and all the tendons are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in surgery, when the pain is in the shoulder and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes as far as the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations where the pain is located, and one cautery four fingers above the ankle on the right side; and let the cauterizing instrument be sharp, and burn the tendon; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near the knee, then cauterize where he feels the pain three or four times with the cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the profession is, do it more; and if the pain is dislocated from the groin towards the thigh, do cauterization with the cauterizing knife or circular, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not tire yourself too much with the cautery that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have cauterized above the ankle, and they tired themselves so much that the leg was completely numb, and the foot also, and all the feet were rotten and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a bout of vomiting that resulted in death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is on both sides together, perform cauterization on one and the other, in this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say in the cauterization of the loins, because of this manner, use such a knife and make it as wide as a naval of the little finger, or a bit less, and make it with notches and make the notches go from one to the other at a distance equal to the quantity of a new penny; and the notches should be over two parts, and they should also be like nails, and there is a good handle on the knife.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let it be heated until it is completely red and has a metallic scent, then place it on the boil of the painful side, and turn it over to the healthy side; and cauterize once with the cauterizing iron and leave it for three days; then apply a butter poultice, and keep the wound open long enough; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cauterizing iron because of the fear of its appearance, and it is not seen by many who use it; however, this is a good cauterizing iron, which can bear the pain, and where it is applied.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical cautery is such that you make an instrument of thin metal plates between the edge of the door and the margin, and either of brass or iron at a length of one span, and in the top have II nozzles, and each quantity of the thickness of a quarter; and they are open above and below, and joined together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hot iron on the back of the shoulder lying flat, and quickly place your hand over the hot iron; then pour between the two circles of the hot water which is heated in the fire I pound, and let it stand for an hour with strong heat, and suffer the hairs to be burned and scorched by the heat.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is also healing with fire as with burning; and when the burns have passed, gently lift your hand with the instrument and raise the waist from below, leaving it for three days, and put on butter until the black of the scar is removed; and leave it for three days so that the skin can contract; and this would be the last aid after the cure of burns until they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, use the instrument that stains the skin according to what you have done in the waist, and this is the method of hot wax, and I wrote about it in the treatment of medical correction.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take quicklime and live chalk, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or if he has a small hole other than the point of a razor that can fill it; and put that in another well-pounded pot, and put over it quicklime and chalk and stir gently until there is a second layer of powder on top; and leave it thus until it drips water and chice or pot pounding, then take all the water, and pour it over quicklime and over quicklime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And if it is very painful and is administered in the form of workmanship and cauteries of other members, for it does useful work like fire, and if it is other medicines that are well cauterized on the back, such as mustard plaster and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	Galien tells us of a cure where some were cured of the pain of the back and sciatica, and they were very grateful, and he says that no other cure was done, and that they were healed once when this cure was done, and he was bathed as he teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And in this way, you should grasp a certain amount of fresh and dry verdigris, and pound it well with a little grease, and place it on the back, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, and cover it; and leave it for three hours and by the amount that the hairs no longer feel the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let the patient enter a warm bath until the skin is slightly reddened, and let the patient enter bed, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And it is advised that no one should use such cautery or medicine unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the vein of the head is cauterized with burning goat fat, it helps a lot; and it should be done in a similar manner by the cauterizer.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take linen and soak it in old oil, and place it on the sinus that is between the thumb and the other one called the "foscile".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Then take some dry goat fat, and put it in the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen, and let it soak until it is saturated; and do this again and again, and do not stop doing this until you think that it reaches the back, and that the pain is ceased; and this method of cauterization is called "goat fat cauterization".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of two arms
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or from shock or from too great evacuation, or from similar matter expanded and cold, none of these situations is worth cauterizing, because those who come from infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the pain that the hairs are filled with fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on top of the back, where the pain is, three lines deep, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the pain can bear; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called «poins»; and if you see, make III cauteries or IV at the average cautery called «clavile» in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Frequently, this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have stiffness in their back when they walk, and fear; and you will find it at the last thoracic spine and in the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize it with the fire cautery in this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery grasps each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the fire cautery holding two or three lines apart, and the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment, the limb should be kept as we have said, and you must not apply cauterization in a way that causes nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of the joints is due to moisture that has spread to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes from the feet, which is properly called "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it must be treated with cauterization in this manner: apply a large amount of cauterization around the joint, and let the cauterizing oil be applied in this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is a need to hold the face down with the knife, then perform the entire cauterization with the "point" that is claimed.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come from the joint and other joints, and it happens often, then perform cauterization on each joint with three or four cautery irons of each part, at every cauterization; and if you have more skill, do so, but do not hold your hand farther than the end of the handle of the knife.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the joint and the back, then administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are on the fingers, make points around the nail two lines; and if they do not remain in place, make points above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come from the wrist or shoulder, cauterize each part, and provide good management and proper medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you provide good management and purge the humor, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the wound from the tooth
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a wound comes from an angle, and the pus descends to the groin and it is newly formed, then when you see it to be healed, that it does not move much that day; and that you use things that relieve the stomach, so that the pain decreases from his belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to keep his arm straight until the pus is repairiet, and the pain is gone, and signify a sign that is like half of a circle above the wound over the bone of the wrist, then warm the cauterizing iron:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and drips honey.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the dirt from the joint; and the minister stains his hand above so that it does not return backwards; and work well on the thighs at the shoulder, and put disinfectant and serum on the thighs, and the other on the lowest part that stains the hands; then put the cautery on the sign all over your hand, and hold the right and left until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again with another until you come close to the bone; and be careful that the dirt does not come out when you do the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the pain does not die, or other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And if you do not apply the fire cautery to the bone, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterizer for children be subtle according to their age, and for adults as large as they are; after three days care for the wound of the fire cautery until the eschar is formed; then care for other wounds until they are healed, and grind the hairs on their back for forty days until the wound is well scarred; and it is necessary that their movements be restricted for a long time, so that the blisters do not form when they move.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	After forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be fed a well-cooked meal, and for the next forty days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and avoids too much repletion from drinking and eating, and too much heat; and when he follows this instruction, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	I will tell you about the treatment after cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, let him have the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be applied to one third of the wound; after the treatment as we have said; and no ancient ones have said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the shoulder blade protruding and make a line across the width of the rip, and another below, and hold your hand to all the burning cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first burns are lighter and more painless.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether it is to fall or to strike, and this pain lasts long, and the medical cure does not help, then it must be cauterized with the burning iron called "pons", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its strength and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cautery is healthy and well-done, it's good; if not, start another cautery above the first one, as it is customary that it should be applied to the member that is nearest, because you must do the cauterizations until the hairs are healed.
de meselerie	to cauterize
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	Cauterization is never done without great help, and at the same time the disease that comes from the putrefaction of pus and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see that the cauterization is done, take precaution if the disease is at the beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not spread or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will not spread throughout the wound, then do three cauterizations above the head: I bring the head to the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the cheeks; and II above the two corners, and I behind the neck; and leave as much hand as the cauterization reaches the bone, and as long as the scabs come out so that the vapors of the large humors can escape; and cauterize the wound according to what is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the injury is widely spread; and it is clearly apparent, so you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery in the nose, and two cauteries above the spine of the neck, and six cauteries above the spine of the back, and one great one above the buttocks and one other below, and two above the shoulders, and two above the elbows, and two above the knees, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and above the wounds of the hands; and beware of those that are above the lower back calcifying, that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery above the bone of the little finger, and one above the bone of the stomach, and one above the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And the more you do cauterization, the less you need to help, and it benefits him; and know that the pain is not felt as much in cauterization as it is felt by the healthy one, because the body is already corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	It should be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After curing the limb with flour and honey, and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you do cauterization above the limb according to its length and width; and let the cauterization be a little inside the edge of the wound; then treat the pain until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never performed fire cauterization by hand and on the back and at the base of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus if it is set, it becomes inflamed; and in any case, no one interferes unless they are knowledgeable about the members and their issues moving the body.
de albaras	I'm sorry, I don't understand your request
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medical art does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little in front, according to the quantity of the courage, until the blench is set, and its color is restored; then treat with flour and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and salt of colon and salt of almond, each part; and mix everything together, and apply it to the wound, and cover it with a cloth, and keep it on the body until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre first appears and you cannot stop its spread, then cauterize it with a cauterizing iron shaped like a circle around the entire edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise say that one should also make a cauterization in the middle of the chancre; and I do not think it is good because I believe it will not become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen once; and a more important thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cauterizing iron called "circle", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die or due to the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are very old and have little blood, or due to the tension; then you see it hastening to die: therefore cauterize around with many small cauteries pricking; afterwards leave it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through all the cauterization, then heat the cauterization from where this is the form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced through, and be such cauteries that the hairs feel afterwards in a similar manner as the course of the pustule is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until they are completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron.
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing but a small amount of member, for it bends the members as if the dry reeds.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the limb that can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat the cauteries clavile very small and great, according to what is needed for the limb or the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply the cauterized ointment on the wounds with oil until the scabs from the fire are removed and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of burns, char.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy char does not grow, it is good; and if not, then restart the cauterization on the remaining corruption.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has never been cured by medical ointment in the place of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is always greater help, and I have already told the cure of the medical ointment in the division: take it when you have need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the broken bones that come from the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	often from the feet comes a disease called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a great thing that causes the foot to swell greatly.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries of this disease are according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization and water-hot cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is that you heat the cauterizer like a pen of quill, and it is made of good iron at the measure that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and that it has thin edges; afterwards, put it all hot on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make an ointment of wild herbs crushed with oil, and leave the ointment all night, and the nail will close and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the limb with heat until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by the body's heat, and often in hands and feet, it is necessary to cauterize with hot iron; and it is done in this way: take a needle of iron or steel, or a quill pen, and place it on the nail and the cuticle, that is to say, the skin around the nail; then put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand so that the edge of the needle comes to the root of the nail, and find the hot water penetrating deeply up to the root; and suffer the pain of the hot water for one hour; then leave it thus, and it will all fall off at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Then do another one, until you have removed all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds that entangle the heart.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When anyone trembles from cold or from a quarter fever or other, it is necessary that you make four cautery burns or four above the spine of the back; one cautery between each spine; and one on the chest, and one above the stomach at the cauterizing olive; this will allow them to tremble, and will hasten the healing of the disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No matter how often the body is washed, or the pustules are popped that come from large, corrupting matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary when they appear that a fire cautery be performed on each pustule head: a subtle fire cautery from a twig of mugwort, of which the point is grasped in the fire, or from the root of aristolochia, or with a lenticular cauterizer.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And no matter how often they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and it cannot grow again, but is broken up from the excess from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	often there is great bleeding from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the sides, or at the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case when this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press very hard until the bleeding is stopped and no more blood comes out; then put the cauteries of olive oil several times, both small and large, as long as they are all red; then apply I, or a great or little one according to the wound and the limb in which the artery is severed, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if the first one you lift above the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then quickly take the other cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to apply them one after the other until the wound is cleansed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes over the wound; and be sure that when the artery is not cut, it cannot be properly stopped immediately if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong thread, or by medicines placed on top which have power to stop bleeding; and let it be tied and pressed.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the tightening of knots closely with cloth or metal things burning above, or other similar things, does not benefit unless they do not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they do not have any medicine present, they should place their little finger index above the wound of the vein as we have said, and well tighten until it is tightened above the wound and above the vein; and they should not move it, but they should rub it with cold water often until it is very cold so that the wound does not freeze and swell up and tighten; and make inquiries about what they need for cauterizing and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures of tails
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter of all diseases where it is necessary to cauterize with fire or burning medicine, and the conditions and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I will put this chapter about the lower limb from head to foot, and I will go into this chapter by that same way so that we can find more easily what we want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore when I begin this chapter, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to take greater care.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come in cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from such people who are so with their disease that they die immediately because of the harm they receive from their disease, and the greatness of its malice; and of these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these, there are those who give you their sense, and say: "Wait, I am in pain"; and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not necessary to grant permission to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely of that of which you are certain, and which you have taken and lost; and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your ills for health to be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory for long.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to breathe from the holy inspiration of his hand, indeed.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you to this chapter by advising from other chapters, according to what it is before or a chapter of cauteries, that I have advised from the beginning to the end, so that you find it more easily what you will have to do.
dou chief plein d’aigue	the beginning full of sharp
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease comes often to children at birth, and when the midwife presses too hard on the child's head; and sometimes it comes because of a repelled cause that one is not.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and to all those that I have seen it was fatal; and therefore it seems to me that it is better to avoid the work in such treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child who was complaining of severe pain in the shoulder, and the head was swelling each day until it could no longer bear it; and he thought so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is gathered outside the bone above the shoulder joint, between the skin and the bone; and the procedures are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide cut in the head; and it should be as long as twice our finger, so that the moisture flows out; and take the shape of the space:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more extensive, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are the commissures of the joint opening on each part, and the sharp pain when you press it with your hand from inside, and it does not return: then you must make three cuts in the head like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After straining the cuts with cloths and powders, and putting in wine and oil, leave it thus for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with tents and counter-irritants, and keep the shoulder strained evenly, and gradually introduce dry food without moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	Another method of incision is to look at the size of the abscess and the angle of the needle; for it is never in front, never behind, never on the right side, and never on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, open the abscess and fill the needle, and make the cut according to what you can do; and be careful not to cover the artery; and if blood flows, it can cause the wounds to die due to the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	to return
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it comes to a certain disease called "cataract" in the eyes or on the pupil, and the disease is ancient, and the medical treatment does not help much, then the cure is to cauterize with what is used to cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the hairs growing long and even, it is necessary to let them grow until they reach their full length; then rub the skin with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then pull back the hair on the entire cloth; then look where the blood flows, and the veins on both sides of the ear are usually close together, and then place a bandage over them; then sign the bandages at the same spot, then cut both with a sharp knife until the wound comes just short of the bone, and this should be done carefully to avoid injuring the skull.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, push the sharp knife away from the artery and cut above it, as you would through the skin.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then continuously pour water from above.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open at first feeling, then measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then sign it and apply it to the bone; and what is needed for the arrow is six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, depending on how much the wound can bear, and the replacement of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point, if the coping that we apply does not come out, then cover the wound and tie, and the ointment cure until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of the shoulder
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient shoulder ailment comes, and the fire cauterization is not effective due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and the old age and similar things, and it is treated by means of medical cures and nothing helps him, then we must cauterize the arteries of the temples and do as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the hairs of his temples should be made to face backward, and he should listen to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and it is not restored until in some men who are too cold; and if it is restored, then one should strain the skin with some cloths, then rub the skin with any rough cloth, and heat the skin with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then slightly scrape the light skin until you reach the artery, then cut it upwards with pincers, and pull out several threads that are stuck to each part; and if the artery is thin, turn it to the tip of the needle, then cover that part according to the amount of the two chapters.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	But if it is not covered, it will not heal at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from the sixth chamber to the third; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two lengths of a strong silk thread, which does not allow any blood to come before the scab of the wound, and comes out as clots of blood; then cover the excess that is between the two threads in the same hour, and then, if you see, if the fire cauterizes the cutellaire cautery up to the bone until the chapters are covered; and this is the final work, if the wounds do not have fever and he is of hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery, it is used to finish off moistures: because it is the greatest help against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When it is necessary for the extraction of arteries, one should fill the wound with old cotton and place dry bandages on top; and when they are removed, care should be taken with dry medicines that make charcoal and bandages until they are healed; and if there is no court of the artery, as much as you can work, then hasten to cover it with fire cautery, or fill the wound with vitriol and strain it to your hand so that the wound does not become stained; and if you do not have this present, then place ice on the wound until the wound is congealed, and raise the wound with boiling hot water until it is stopped, and keep it as it should be; and what is more difficult and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery cutting from II parts, but the cuts should be well spaced to last longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instrument is too tight, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a gap of large space, and then when you have inserted the two blades, and you melt the hot iron above until it comes near the bone, and cover the vein in two places; and they should be separated between the two cuts because there is no surety of this cauterization at all; and this is the form of the cauterization:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are dripping from veins that are above the surface of the chief of the forehead, and it does not improve with any medicine, and you see the face of the pain twisted, and it feels like a tremor; and they are held and moist so that the hairs of the eyelashes are soaked, and the eyelashes are curled, and scorched by the heat of the tears, if there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient "wound healer," and you should apply pressure to the painful part that has this disease, whether it is front or back, then make three cuts equally long according to the length of the front; and one of the cuts as two teeth down from the front in descending, and the others two on each side of the ribs, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are on each side of the ribs; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and for each wound the quantity of three doses through the joins; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to soak up the blood, then stop the bleeding with the shape of this:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made from the temple down to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two cuts up to the surface of the bone, then make another incision from the other side of the same incision to the other second, and then extract this piece of bone.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you put the tool called "curette" in the first incision, it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp edge of the tool towards the bone and the blunt side towards the skin, and scrape until it reaches the same incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for all the vessels that descend from the head as far as the eyes until the incision is continuous to the depth where the knife opens, and then make another one in the same wound towards the other side; and then extract the arrow evenly, and express the blood from the wound taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each wound, and put on dressings moistened with wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not come; and for the wound, apply a great deal of vinegar, then the ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other cures to heal wounds, as long as they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	The return of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When anyone comes for the operation of cautery, and you see the eyes tight and small, and weakened vision, and the papers burned; and the hairs are shaved, and the pain in the forehead is great, and the eyelashes are out; then by these accidents that those matters and that cautery do not come but from many wounds, and the patient's condition that there is, if this is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you command the patient to turn his head back, then make a great cut through the forehead, and another wide at the top of the nose.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And from the wound on the right temple to the left temple, and let the incision be just to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the mouth; and when the bone is exposed, suck out all the blood with a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the wound and put on cotton and linen; then cover with moistened cloths mixed with wine and oil, and guard against abscess forming; when it is removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until charred begins to form, then care for things that cause healing, like honey.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of mustard, and make a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to draw out the char perforce throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the dizziness of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that which goes into the ears is one of the four things: grains, beasts, stones or similar things like iron; seeds, such as grapes, beans, and peas; or things flowing such as sharp and smooth things and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it goes into the ear as a stone or other similar thing that does not fit well in the ear, it does not grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sunlight.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the arrow, if any drop of violet or fennel oil drips, then relieve extraction; and the effect is to sneeze out conditions, and when sneezing comes, cover the nose, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and hold the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often this treatment causes vomiting; and if it does not cause vomiting, then relieve extraction with subtle pins of this form.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it vomits with the pins, it is good; if not, then relieve extraction with a subtle thin needle; and if it does not vomit through this, make a rain-can and blow into the head of the can or the ear hole very hard, and stop the nose with molten wax so that the rain cannot enter; then remove it properly, for often vomiting occurs as we have said; and if it does not vomit in this way, take some cloth and put it over the ears, and use any instrument that is sharp to make, and put a little cotton around; then press the cloth above the arrow or whatever it is, and remove it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If she does not jump from all these things that we have said, then quickly pierce the ear as soon as an abscess forms and bleeds, and spasms; and the manner of the piercing is such that you first make a small incision in the painful part of the ear, and extract the pus according to its measure of virtue, then place the pus between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the grease depends; and let the incision be as smooth as a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it according to your power, and suck vigorously to your mouth; and the cure until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is small and swollen, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer the following remedy:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that small one.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make a large incision when you think the ears are moist due to moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine pincers and saline solution, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of an earache, it is necessary that the hairs be cleaned with a first aid kit, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let it lie across the very ear itself where the acute pain is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out because of the heat, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many thin stones according to the length of your thumb, and heat them in the fire; and put the hairs one or two at a time into the ear, and step on them from the other foot, and strike with another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until the acute pain is all gone, and thus it will all go out; and if you see, take a stick, and burn one of the hairs in the ear, and the other head hold from the fire until the thinnest stick is broken; then make another like this until the acute pain is all gone, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it is of small size, such as a mouse and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size, such that one can feel it, then alleviate extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms in the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should look into the ear with the sunlight: if there are no worms, then remove them with subtle pincers, and if there are none, take the cotton of this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put the more subtle head in the ear according to the amount of pain, then it is well for the whole body; do this often until all the ver are seen.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, then stupefy the body with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they still do not come out as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where they treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, of which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether it is made of silver or tin, it should be inserted into the small holes, and above over the openings to distill; and to press within the distillation, use a well-made tin instrument for this, and if you see pren the razor and wrap it around the point evenly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see from your medicines in the cane, and the cane should be in the ear; then squeeze through the razor all the cotton, and press your hand temprement until the oil is distilled or slightly out of the ear; and the sense of the bad insides, and it should be the distillations I poc eschaufee to the fire as well as when it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of ear obstruction
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some obstruction in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by ear obstruction, or from a foreign body inside the ear, and this obstruction never comes out of the ear unless one can see it; and it never comes out without some small obstruction, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes out of the ear if one cannot see it is from severe inflammation in many positions, and in this one where one sees it is necessary to put the ear with the bad side to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening at the end of this space where this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let the patient move and trenching in front and behind all plain, so that it does not bleed the ear; if the opulation is of charred or corpse of the ear, then hold the ears with subtle pincers, and the cover lightly, until that char is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the opulation is in the front of the ear, then take a subtle razor lightly and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the corpse of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the opulation that the patient feels grated at the ear, lightly pierce, and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the puncture, and moisten with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not apply any treatment until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose oil, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top; if you see the ear swelling, then remove the tent and use another one moistened with rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat as needed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if blood comes out, soak an sponge and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding of blood which are used to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the writing of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the method for removing thorns from papers when they are wet and dry: spread them out with tongs and pincers, and remove the roots of their points; then place them on a lead plate of its base.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without removing them, the cauterizer cauterizes with a subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is wasted; and many times they repair, but nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	of the sand
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Frequently, in papers, there are things that seem to be gritty in their form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large on the paper above and below; the work is as follows: if the hail moves from one side to another, it is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then scrape each part lightly, then take it with pincers, and the cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you do not cover it with a small puncture in the paper, it does not hurt the patient; and if the force is great, it assembles at a seam, and the cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the wounds will restore quickly and inflame.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the splinter is large and descending into the inner part of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and extend the splinter to a pair of tweezers, and hold and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is moved by incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the splinter is removed, pour in some oil of strong salt, and heal the wound until the pain is gone.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that is smeared on the upper part of papers, and it has more in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they come to have diarrhea in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears stick to their eyes; and because they lie down, they sleep on their faces adhered, and sleep on top, and their papers are outside their eyelids moist that it swells and appears covered with exinach that opens in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your touch and feel the extrusion between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the work is that the hairs put their head in your hand; and then take a cloth of linen, and make a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains extrusion from each part, then place it on top of it; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the extrusion is assembled inside the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture at the spatula a wide slit, and not be any larger than the wound on the vein; and cut the skin until you come to the extrusion; and in many positions comes extrusion from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the horsehair from all of one piece of cloth between your fingers, and turn your hand to the right and left as it is spread; and be careful not to stick in the wound, that you do not bring the whole of the splintered material to the oil, that you do not harm it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not exit at the beginning of the wound, gently scrape the wound until it opens; then remove it as we have said, then moisten and dry cloths, and put on the wound, and bandage well.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who breathe and put on cloth to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the healer until they are healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound comes to an abscess, then the healer applies moistening plasters until they are healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in papers hairs are born other than naturally, and are awakened, if they harm the eyes, and bring on various diseases such as tears accustomed and softening of papers and albugine, as long as it is caused by the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or by medicine ague according to what is before or chapter on cauterization, and is done either by incision and suture or by caustics, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the dislocation in your hand, then return the paper of oil to your right hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if there is a needle at the end of the thread above; and so it is on the other side of the paper where the hairs grow above these hairs, and draw the thread above the paper, and return the razor; then in the part outside the paper, outside the hairs adjusted, all the skin covering, from the great calf to the small; then draw the thread, and put outside the paper a small tent of cotton and linen, then on top of the paper a figure of a bandage, like the belly of a martyr, and throughout it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you saw lift the paper which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	If there is a person who has experience in cutting great quantities of paper according to how the paper is soft; then make all the space above the two lines that you have signed, and begin from the large leg just below the small one; and soak one of the holes near the hairs at the root of the largest, then sew the edge into one of the two angles of the quill, then scrape off the skin; then bring together the two lips to a seam of an needle with all the thin thread, and wipe the blood, and dry the excess hair above the two edges at any things gluing, if you see it made; and if not, if you have no care, then leave the seam and the threads just for three or four days; then treat the wound without sewing things dry and constricting, because the paper heals at the moment of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is dry (as they say the ancients), and it is work without fear; and if in another way: and that you sign the paper in a figure that is as equal to the shape of the miracle, if we have counted, at three points you will cut according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply force evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the needles, and the thing is not even, take a needle or it has a thread, and the thread in the shape; and the other thread over the big bone, and the second thread over the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have sewn, as we have told, then assemble the two lips of the wound by sewing, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar soothing substances; and never once has the hair of the paper been converted: if you use what we have said about the incision, but the sewing in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The care of wounds is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and make it according to what I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two subtle links as long as the paper and its width of the space is; and cope with the two questions of the parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what overmounts the paper of the oil, and strain the two dogs from the two parties form; and leave it thus for some time, and the skin that was strained will die and rot and putrefy, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, if the copper has some force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound has been soaked, and if it was raised with paper, and they will not grow back again; and this is the form of the two coins that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you grasp a fine needle, and bring out the silk thread softly and subtly; then assemble the heads and make them both subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order the other fine silk thread briefly, and make the heads of the threads, then put the hairs on your healthy skin; and let it be outside the sun so that the work is hidden, for this is a subtle and small work, then push the needle through the entire length in the root of the raised hair, and pierce it into the paper gently until you pull it out of the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the length of the work, and push that hair into the work, if there is one or two or three or more; then pull your hand so that the hairs come out completely on the entire length with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the arrow is treated and the hairs do not grow back with it, you should re-treat the arrow using the same thread that you had previously ordered, until the arrow becomes fully dry and you can see it through oil; then you should remove the arrow and the thread, close the wound and leave it open for two or three days, until the hair grows back in its place and on the skin; if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long hair from the tail of a wild beast, and elevate it with the other that you leave, until it is fully extended and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the preparation of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or the putrefaction, comes from the oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it occurs from the wound, or from the cutting or cauterizing, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of the work in it is that you break that suture, and dry the lips of it, and put inside linen tents, and bandage it until it is healed; and it is only necessary to use in its care things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than the first; but in the work of things that are softening, such as fenugreek; and the rose of vinegar or alcohol and seeds of linseed boiled, and ointments of quicksilver melted into any of the oils, and there is wrapped a tent, and the care of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your care are that you take precautions so that it does not return to its former form; and this work that we have said is only an approach to this disease, that it does not return to its former form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the oil that comes in the jar
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterization and similar things; and the way of the work is that you hold an needle, in which it has the thread double, and the skein in the jar, and make it pierce from the right arm to the left, so that the thread comes out of both arms; then place the jar above the whole needle, and the cloth wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the paper's shape returns according to what it should be, it is good; if not, take the razor and put it in the wound, and turn the paper, and make two cuts or at the angles of the incision that you have made, and make two angles so that when they are assembled, the shape is as if it were the shape of a letter that has not «I greek»; then remove that char, according to the quantity that its cost is away from, of what teaches the paper, then add the two missing parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure what we have said about softening medicines, and tents, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	If the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, it is necessary to make a plain incision between the hairs of the skin, as I have said before; then squeeze between the two fingers of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters compare all possible means to see how it can return the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for incision and instruments in many positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	soudement of the skin
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this sewing has been done by many people in a similar manner that the paper above is smeared with the white of oil, and cannot move or do its work naturally, then it is necessary to go outside the paper with the point of a razor, and lift it up; and extend it with pincers, until you scrape off what is hard at the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp or too thin, so that the pain does not suffer that the spatula is too sharp or burns the oil; and let your incision, from which you scrape that assembly, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and that whole assembly is healed, and nothing is ever done in strong vinegar, and lukewarm water, and collyrium; then place between the paper and the oil a linen cloth, and put above the oil soft wool in abundance; and after the injury use the collyrium and other remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the elbow of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	There are two ways in which the elbow is affected: one is nervous and resembles a hard, painful knot, and another that is not nervous but resembles a frozen white moisture, so that when touched with iron and rubbed with pincers, it cannot be removed; and both begin near the great arm and grow slowly until they cover the whole eye and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of the incision is such that the evil ones put their head in your hand, then the work begins with the eyes; and take the paper to your hand, then bend the elbow with pincers of small doubled, and raise it above; then take a needle, and put the hair of horse, or of cow, or of beef, and the thread strongly; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the elbow, and push the needle through all the needle, and tie the elbow with a thread and raise it above, and scrape all the hair on the side of the elbow that shows the pearl and the silk to the hair just below, then cover the remaining in the root of the arm to all the subtle spittle and with small forces, and leave the natural skin of the arm, so that by the incision the tears do not come out as usual; and once it was only the elbow at the end of the thread, and if the thread, as we have said; then scrape on all the soft tissue of which this is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be sure that the scalpel does not touch the gristle and break it, and that the water is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little broken silk thread into the oil, and a poultice made of litargire, and let it remain on the other side until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the joint is not flexible, and you cannot insert the needle, and the incisions cannot enter, often this appearance of a joint from medicines is cured; and they are born as I have said in the division, and if you see it covered, then pour oil on the painful part, and take the scalpel lightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And rub the affected joint gently, and if you see that it does not soften and the pain is not relieved, then blow into the oil mixture made of litargire and red wine and beaten egg, and dampen the oil with the other hand; then continue the same work on the other affected joint until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is wrong with the oil, as if it causes an abscess to break, then milk it, and first cure the abscess until it is healed, then continue the work as before until it is completely healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh on the arm is night in the oil by great harm, then spread it on a cloth and let it sit for a part of the day and not all, until tears do not come; then pour red wine colloquium into the oil.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the meat that is born above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men are born without any red meat, and cover the pupil and hold it above papers and turn it back, and it looks like a balcony of balauste; and the work is that the hairs put their head in your own, then work the eyes, and all that meat has suitable incisions to this eye, and support it with force; then cover the first meat, and go all scraping to the razor just at the end, and make sure you do not scratch the oil in the work; and let the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the nail and as small forces of which one takes the base, as it forms after this chapter the demonstration; and when the incision is completed and all the meat is removed, then use the oil of silk broken or you distill red wine colloquium and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil cotton with abin of wool, so that it is assured of aposteme chaut; and if nothing remains, and the skin does not cover, and you doubt aposteme chaut, then leave the oil and treat the aposteme with things apaisant aposteme chaut; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do all meat that is treated in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case, it is necessary that you strengthen the care of each weakness of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the eyes' veins
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	which are red veins that are covered over the oil, and take away from the sight their work and weaken the oil always.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, the first thing you should look at is whether that oil has any other disease besides the red veins; then advise the patient as follows: command the evil that he puts his head in your clean place, then suspend those veins all around according to his wisdom, and let the circles be subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two openings made gradually in one side of the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then apply gentle pressure to those openings gradually, and stop the bleeding with a bandage after some time, until you can remove those openings from the oil; and be careful not to pierce the oil with pointed spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not stop until those openings are removed; and when you have done this, pour green and red wine into the oil to corrupt what remains behind.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all the blood in that hour, then apply a poultice over the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and let it remain for some time until the pain is relieved and it is ensured that an abscess has not formed, then resume according to this method as long as it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The master calls this "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cauterization and with medicine boiling as I have mentioned before, and it is not healed, then make an incision over the abscess where it must die, and drain all the pus that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the tooth is discovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then the instrument of all this is in its form; and it is called «sharp edge», and it must be made of iron from the chief, and it should not be pointed like a lime as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Then place the sharp edge above the jaw of the tooth, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore the jaw with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the tooth is not sound, and there is no new growth, and the body of the gum is sound, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not reopen and is not again infected, and no bad accidents come, then it is healed; if not, then there is no other remedy than to return the abscess to the pus of the neck according to this form: and you must discover the tooth the second time by iron and by medicines, and when it is discovered take the foret according to this form, and let the chosen be of iron at three angles, and let the fust be attenuated just to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it above the bone of the arm, and move your hand away from the oil I poc, then return to the whole forearm until it pierces the bone and the patient feels the pain as if it were coming from inside; and since you have restored the shoulder with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the char is born and hardens the bones, then apply the matter to the elbow; it is a lighter thing for the pain.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the end of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are wide open and do not waver, and there is no disturbance or drowsiness, then you must bind the pain; then cleanse it, then apply leeches or a heated iron to draw out the poison, then put on the oil with a mixture of acid, aloe, incense, and sarcocollis, and then strain the oil, and apply it with bandages and cloths; the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths that are soft enough, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it through a sturdy cloth, and restart the leeches or heated iron to draw out the poison; then remove the leeches and let the oil remain strained day and night, and if it begins to recover, it is good; if not, then restart the bandages and cloths and the mixture and the leeches until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	forced tearing of the uterus
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the uterus, it becomes open, and it is often covered with paper-like substances like resin, and it is difficult to see; if you see it covered, the work is such that you drive a needle into the root of the part below this, then drive another needle or double the thickness of the arm; and pierce it, and let the first needle follow its position; then bind the doubled thread around the uterus, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and put oil on it with a lot of honey; and let it remain until the thread has healed with the uterus, then care for the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and the wound is never covered by the uterus from each part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly swollen, pierce them with a thin needle that comes from the front of the oil, and drain the moisture and descend upon the eyelids, and enter immediately; then extract as much as they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the front of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than a drop that is assembled in the oil, resembling a sharp descending arrow, and this is not sharp; and the way of the appearance of the work is such that you make the pain sit on the seat prepared and straight, then take the chief between your hands for two parts, and move the muffler as much as you see the drop coming up to your eyes; then it should be fixed, and not descend and not be disassembled light, and see the things as they were; and if it does not descend, it is sharp, and if the descending drops are not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If the painful part is placed between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make it pass over the corneal thread and the conjunctive with the corone, until the bone is exposed; and when it is exposed, then pour hot, boiled oil mixed with honey, or vinegar or fenugreek root boiled with honey, then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the hot oils
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have experienced similar things in the division, and what is needed to pierce; so work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary for you to seat the misaligned bone between your crossed hands, away from the light of the sun, and with clean, tightly stretched oil; then place the oil-soaked cloth in your right hand if the bones are crossed, or in your left hand if they are not; then take in your right hand, if the bones are crossed, the instrument called «almagda», or in your left hand if they are not; then place the point of the «almagda» above the crown of the oil on the part of the elbow, then strike the «almagda» virtuously, and withdraw your hand until it pierces the crown of the oil, and feel that «almagda» is coming to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of «almagda» be at the front of the measure of the space between the sun and the beginning of the night; and this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cloth, and then place the instrument above it or at the sharp edge, then expressly remove one after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if he sharpens it now, then he will see the hairs in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting a little, and if he sharpens it again, the second time, put the thread with the instrument, and when it is well fixed and does not rise, gently turn around your hand slightly and slightly; then put a little bit of silk thread, and leave the eye inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by default the eye soaked or in minced meat and oil red and with enough fat, and tie with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	No, and those who are of our kind, put on top with enough fat.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you use the instrument called «albert», of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce only the conjunctive, and do not go too far in front, but make the eye gentle, then drive out the hardness, as we have said; and at the completion of the work compare the patient with the sleep that comes, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and for all movements, take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his disposition until the next day; then release him in the same dark room, and examine his sight, and make him see some things, and then return the bandage on the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this in the first hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you raise the eyelid, for the sharp pain quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come, you should pour hot oil in front of the seventh hour, and apply what allays abscess; and when it is calmed, remove the cloth and put on its face a new one to cover any opening, and let it stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then slowly and gradually leave the house, and convert back to its usual state; and ensure that no one should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in some countries people do all kinds of things to succeed in archery, but I have never seen any in our land, nor have I read any in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almsgiving, because those who do not know them see them; and they are made of pure tin properly.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And the heads of them are of the same subtlety, and the rest in three angles downwards.
de la char sor le neis	of the chair for the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Noses never grow or are born different, because there are some that seem like scorpions at the end of the feet; and if there are such ones or they have a nose with a bad color, and if they have a good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In those noses that are good and not enhanced, it is necessary to place the bad between your hands against the sun; and work their nostrils, and pour the oil into those noses, and remove them; because it is appropriate that you can hold the subtle spike of one part, as long as you know that that nose is completely dry.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that can be covered, open it with all the subtle and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if it is a boil, clean it as it should be; and if it is malignant boils, hurry and cauterize it until the wound is not moist and all the pus is removed. Then pour or rinse with cold and sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the wound does not close, and moisture comes into the palate, if it does not pierce as it should, there is a bone above, preventing the instruments from cutting: therefore you must go with a piece of linen a little thick, and be careful of your hands, and leave a space between each thread of an inch or less; and put the bad ones on the thread of the linen into the wound to come out through the nose; and pull it out as far as it can go inside the mouth; and often do this with children at school, and it is an easy thing for those who want to do it; then hold the one coming out through the nose with one hand, and the other coming out of the mouth with the other hand, and clean them one after the other as we do with our fingers.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you see that they have not corrupted that char, then remove the filth, soak the wound with blood, and moisten the cloth in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the nose as before; do this three times or more, until the ointment has corroded all that remains of the char; then put a plaster of unsalted butter for several days until it is healed, and if it needs medicated oils, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, by which one distills oils and medicines on the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cup, and conduct it thus; and if you see, make a closed cup, and let the instruments be plain for purifying the head; and have one hand on the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the fire cautery
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease arises at the tip of the nose that is called "telul", and it grows and becomes large, as if it were a separate thing to look at; and for this reason, it is necessary to cover it at the beginning, and let it all go, then place the fire cautery or the burning medicine on the tip of the nose; and if one delays in covering it until it is large, if it is hard, of poor color, and without sensation: if one does not touch it with iron, because it is an infected abscess, for when one covers it once, then great harm comes to the tip of the nose; and if the abscess is softly touched, not with iron, and you see that one can cover it all, then remove the disease and the covered part without fear, and cure the nose of other things that restrict and bind it.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	it is better to use one of these cartilaginous parts, which is more effective in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if the wound is fresh and full of blood, look at whether the lips are swollen on both sides; then stitch them together at a seam, and treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already scarred on one side and not on the other, it is necessary to scorch all the parts that are not healed, then bring the two lips together at a seam, bind them, and powder with powder of dragon's blood, and broken incense; place the powders on a piece of strong or other strong plaster, and leave it until it bleeds through, then treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of sewing is such that you assemble the wound: either by needles, as we have said in the sewing of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Sometimes there are abscesses inside the lips that are hard and resemble grains of different sizes, both small and large; therefore, it is necessary to turn out the lips, and cut under each one, and take the pus with forceps and clean every part; then apply the wound after incision with crushed garlic, until the pain is not stained; then the saliva, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the toothache
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	often arises above the teeth due to caries, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to support it with forceps, and cover its root, and let out the pus or blood; then place on the tooth vitriol crushed glass, or other powders that are astringent and desiccating; and if the toothache returns after the incision, and often does, then cover it again, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for covering.
des sordens	of deafness
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Never gather the roots of teeth, within the mouth between the gums, sharp instruments that are disgusting and harsh; and never gather black, yellow, and green teeth, until corruption comes to the gum, and are foul-smelling; so you should make the bad thing between your hands, and its roots be in your holy place, and remove the roots or the sharp instruments that appear, until nothing remains; and thus make the black and green, and yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned; and if you remove what is at the first layer, it is good; if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and be aware that teeth have a matter of various forms of instruments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the razor that removes the teeth has other forms than those that remove between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the toothache, do not delay in pulling it as long as possible, for no one should do this; for it is a substance very high and thus one does not have any excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the toothache is severe and you must pull it, then it is necessary to be sure of the tooth that hurts.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain of the toothache is due to an unholy tooth, and one must check if it is a holy tooth, and pull out the good tooth; and then the pain does not depart immediately, because the evil ones are still there, for we have already done this to these saints; and when you are sure of the tooth that hurts, then it is necessary to burn around the tooth on all sides very hard to protect the gum from all parts; then loosen it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the first and second joint, until it is well dislocated, then tighten the pliers well; and let the one who has the toothache in your holy mouth between your teeth, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After straightening the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump back, take any of these instruments and gently tap on each part lightly, and shake it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and damaged, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where the pulp is; and if the extraction is subtly tied with wires, so that it does not break during extraction; and it is very important to cover around the gum to displace the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful not to break it, and that a part remains, and again cause pain by the evil of the root greater pains of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be warned that you do not act in such a way as the ignorant physicians who, by their haste and boldness, break the chariots every time, and do not heal what we have told; but bring about once by the quackery of this great disease for the roots that they delay, or for the chariot that they break, as we often see; and when the dense is drawn, wash the limb with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood comes out, which often happens, use the limb with broken glass; and if it does not work, cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, by which one moves the first tooth, should be long and thick, so that they do not double back when you pull out the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be thick-bodied so that they do not bend when pulling out the tooth, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be sharp to hold.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the tooth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains when pulling out the tooth, it is necessary to put a piece of clean, soft cotton on the tooth or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	so that the tooth is worn down, then insert the pliers called "algefri," which the patient resembles a beak; and they should be made inside like a hook and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out at all these needles, then it is necessary that you dig around the root entirely, and put the tool called "althali", which is a spoon, of which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And if it is too large and does not break in half, and if the root jumps upwards, it is good; if not, then you can use all the tools, of which these shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this tool with two prongs, of which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the reason of the teeth, and of this tool which seems like large needles, of which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this instrument is not to be broken unless it cannot be repaired, and it is made of many dense materials; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned here; and the wise masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease show them, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach about the instrument due to the diversity of the cases and if it is broken, since if they search for the instruments that are necessary, as I have told you and helped with gestures, of which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And they are thick and well holding to hold the bone so it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; then restore the limb with medicines appropriate for this, and if there is pus in the bone and it is small, then the whole instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural course, and its shape is ugly, and especially in young women, it is necessary that you remove the tooth after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot be a dentist without it: then the rat; and if it is attached with the tooth, take this instrument which is shaped like a small beak, and it is similar to a sharp iron pointed at the top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the hammer gently and slowly for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be extracted, then the lime from a piece of lime shaped like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the lime of which we make arrows; and in the lime, the tooth is gradually and gently moved, so that it does not move until it is cut; then the flat end is used to scrape away all the roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth in front are loose, or by percussion or falling out, and the pain cannot press upwards because it makes them bleed, and you must treat them with tightening medicines, but this does not work; then you must tie them with a gold wire, for silver wire turns green and rots, but gold never changes; and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are moving, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the broken teeth between the healthy ones, if there is one or more, until you feel secure on the other side; then start the covering again from the part where you began, and press your hand subtly and securely, so that it does not move at all; and let your wire be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the broken teeth with a thin wire, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth and the gum, so that it does not bleed the tongue; and then leave it so tight as it can hold, and if it slips, or the wire breaks, if you have another wire, it holds and serves in this way throughout its length, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the cementing of two healthy teeth, and two broken ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth breaks, if you put it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and it does not interfere with anything that is wise and suffering, and never made the shape of a bone tooth of a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and tie it as we have said, and holds and serves in this way throughout its length.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of covering the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	There are no joints of the tongue that come out of its place or by nature, which is born thus; or by accident of a wound; and the works are such that you open the mouth of the painful, and hold their head in your own, and raise the tongue; then cover the nervous of the large, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or not, and it is from a severe wound, if you boil the thistle and cover the large gently; and be careful that the wound is not too much in front, for the artery which is out; and when you have done, lift the tongue of high rose and of cooling, or of high cold, then put out the tongue a linen tent; and the wound every night, so that the tongue cannot stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if blood comes out, put some borax on the wound; and if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize with slow-burning charcoal, which is good for the wound; then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that it is a black or dark and hard spot, where the patient does not feel pain, do not touch it, for it is chancre; and if it is declining towards discharge, and there is moisture, pour some thin alcohol on it from both sides, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if it does not stop bleeding at your work, put borax on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your work until you have removed all of it; then lift the wound dressing and bandage, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No time comes from within the throat boils that are called "godath", and they are properly called the two tonsils, and when you cure them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then take care: if it is an abscess hard and of small size and of yellow color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, but let it drain as much blood as possible; and then you will break it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of white color and the root is thin, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first check that the abscess has rested and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then place the misaligned limb in front of the sun, and its joint should be in a straight position, and the instrument should be held in one's hand, and press the tongue away from all the tools, from which this form is made; and it should be of silver or fine brass like some knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	If you press the tongue against all these tools, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and the needle in the amber, and bring it up above as much as you can; and take nothing else with you, then cover the instrument, of which this form is made, which looks like a forceps; and all the while the head is bent, one side to the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use a pair of pliers, with which it has the following form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And on one side, it is sharp, and on the other, blunt; and when you have removed one of the tongs, remove the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the sharp pain with hot, sharp, and salty water, and if blood comes out, gargle the sharp pain with hot, squeezed juice of green pomegranates or mullet, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then cure it until it is healed; and never do other abscesses than the two tongs, so remove them in the same way as the two tongs should be.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	I treated a woman with an abscess that was lodged deep within her throat, namely a small abscess; it had nearly closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe or swallow, and she died if she persisted in this condition for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had been punctured twice through the nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I therefore immediately punctured it once through one nostril, then removed a large portion of the pus; I then punctured another part through the other nostril, and pressed on the tongue to keep the mouth open; after puncturing the abscess again, I removed a part, and only a small amount of blood came out; thus the woman was able to breathe again, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop cutting away at that abscess for a long time; the abscess would recur and fill up the cavity that I had emptied, growing very large; therefore I pushed it back and cauterized it inside her throat: thus she did not grow worse; and I left her with these parts, and only God knows what happened to her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When referring to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is not large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, and you see that the abscess is calmed, and it is thin, then you should apply a poultice; and the one that is round and not long; and if it is bloody or dark red, then you should avoid incision of the.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the pain.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	When you see it, as I have mentioned, according to its shortness and length, place the misaligned part in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the tool that we mentioned earlier; then make an incision at the one end, and remove it, and sew it with the two tools that I mentioned in the incision of the two needles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not sew more than the excess which is outside the natural limit; for if you sew too much, it will cause great pain to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we mentioned in the incision of the two needles, and cure it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the pain is too great, then you should use a device for the cauterization of the sensitive area.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of the cauterization is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient places his head on your shoulder, and then presses his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and applies it with very hot, quick fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and with this movement of the instrument, which is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the patient places his head on your shoulder, and then presses his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and applies it with very hot, quick fire, so that it is not too thick or too clear; and with this movement of the instrument, which is the form: and places a hair or something on the medicine, like the movement of a spoon, and places the instrument on all the medicine over the tongue; and the patient lies on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flows from his mouth into the medicine inside, so that it does not drip down his throat and the blood; then hold your hand over the medicine and press it over the tongue for a quarter of an hour, until you see the medicine is working and the medicinal properties of the medicine are soothed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wipe the cotton in the medicine, and blow the instrument through the cotton into the throat, until the cotton is burned over the tongue; and do this often, until the cauterization of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry for four or five days; and if you have the skill to begin the cauterization of the medicine again, then begin, and after the cauterization wipe it around the tongue with cotton soaked in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be washed with hot water, and be treated with garglings until they are healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more safe from incision than the cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take sage and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and similar herbs, and gather all or some of them in a pot, and put vinegar in it, and let it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it should be of silver or tin, and one of the tips of the instruments should be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is dead; afterwards, repeat this often, until the eye dries, and guard that you do not make a hole at the beginning of the outbreak of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make a hole except at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a sponge and place it inside the mouth to prevent the patient from biting; for the sponge does not cause the steam to bother the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Often, one should pull out objects from the throat or fish bones, or nothing at all; therefore, you must remove what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun at all instruments, so that you can see the thing; and what does not open and is returned in the throat, it is necessary to make vomit the bad thing as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if the thing is removed by vomiting; or the bad things swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a lettuce root, or the small piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to the thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes back, it will be removed, and then pull out further; and if it does not come out because of what we have said, then take the instrument from the bottom according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And the instruments should be curved at the top so that they can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that nothing enters it, or push the bone inside; and it is better that the hairs push the instrument, for it is often soft or the thing is as such; if the push goes down, or it pulls the entire instrument evenly, until it is full.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat's soreness
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine is used for the throat's soreness, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and if it does not improve, then look at the throat's pain to the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the shoulder blade, treat it with all small nails, or with delicate needles that are worth a lot.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, take a hairy cat, and put it in the neck of the patient, then pull out or move the hair of the cat with iron hot, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the wounds are infected all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in the direction of swallowing, and move it to his hand often; and when the shoulder blade soon feels the cold, it will stop.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not die as we have said, then smoke the pain away with asafetida, with the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will disappear.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of the fumigation is that you hold a pot with burning charcoal in it, and place it covered by a cloth perforated in the middle, and in which the smoke passes; then pour your fumigation, and put the head of the patient in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the fumes do not escape but go up to his nose; and the nose will now clear up, and if it does not die, repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient drink things that are salty and other, and do not drink anything sharp; and then he will be in a position where he can recover by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to treat the throat, namely when one can see it, resembles a curved hook to enter the throat; and it has the shape of a beak, and there is roughness from lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot slip.
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	There are many kinds of abscess, according to what the memory comes here after one and another in this book, and they differ in puncture and cut; and it is in two ways that the one is in its own likeness, and because it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those who are at court.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the shoulder are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if an abscess is not to be pierced until the boil is completely healed; and if for some it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are beyond joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come beyond joints, and it is left until it is swollen around, perhaps because the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which it is the cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	When the abscess is located deep within the limb, and if you delay perforation until it has died, it will harm the main limb; or if it is located deep within the base, if you pierce it before it dies, it will not be able to pass through, and will remain long inside, and there comes a fistula; and it cannot be healed in a short time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary to scrape the edge of the perforation of the abscess that has died according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and inflammation, and the relief and reduction of the main abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary to make the perforation where the abscess is most dependent, and where it opens most widely; and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscesses are at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all cases equally where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when an abscess is in the throat, it is better to leave the puncture until it is confirmed that digestion has been completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you puncture it before that, it may extend along the vein of the blood, and is covered in much filth; and perhaps they harden the lips and pierce through it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that is punctured according to the wide vein, as the member has need of it.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is appropriate to treat small abscesses with small incisions; and large abscesses with large incisions, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses or it is necessary to cover them, and to dress them; when they have become as soft as cloth, and are softened, it is appropriate to treat them as one would with bubbles: and if such abscesses are cut in three angles, and if such abscesses are covered as the back of a mule, and other similar shapes, and coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a boss, such as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you puncture them clearly; and if the abscesses are large, and they have a lot of pus, and you puncture, if you do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part; then treat the abscess on the other day, then take nothing else afterwards; do this gradually, many times, until the pus is all out; especially if the wounds are of weak virtue, or women carrying, or small children, or old decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the experienced ones, there is no need to fear with the end of the bow, for by chance, the patient may die, and you will not perish.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have perceived your abscess, dry the wound, and see if the abscess wound is small; and if a tailor complains, soothe him with linen or cotton cloth; and if there are large abscesses, and there is much pus, it is necessary that you fill each one with old cotton or shredded linen to avoid moisture, and tie it to the wound; then open, and treat the dressing until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is bleeding in your work, apply sharp cold and cooling, and wipe the cloth, and put it on the wound repeatedly for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply proper treatment and care, and use the powders I mentioned in this book, and if it is very tense, and if the wound or abscess is very painful, then it is best to put on tents and wipes soaked in wine and oil; and if it is in a bad state, and the wound is charred, then it is best to use wipes soaked in cold and oil, or warm wine and oil, as we have said; and then remove the abscess, drain and treat, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	when small abscesses appear on the face, and are of the kind that are in cloth, such as the wart of a girl, and many are like this.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are also large and such ones that have moisture like chickenpox; and if there are some that are hard and pustular at the cutting, and there is no doubt if the artery is not against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the works of the belly are such that you test with all the tool called "rectoscope", from which the shape comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then do it by passing through the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape off nothing left behind that contains that moisture, for it returns when one leaves anything; then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if present; if not, in vinegar and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and this will continue what is remaining at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, as before, the second day, and the third, until you are sure it will not remain overnight; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess is large, then cut it open according to this form, from the long side; and pour in your medicines, and scrape the skin from all parts, and put all your care into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery opposes, do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do this for the abscess if it is pierced, and cut and treat as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And if the abscess is on the belly, it is less heavy, for it contains little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or boils has no moisture, and if it is one of the abscesses I copied from an old woman; and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if one had tried to cut it, they would have made as bad a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head or ears, the opening should always be at the lowest point of the ear, to let out the pus; and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	of tumors
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	often have abscesses at the neck, and remove the tumors, and cause pain, and sometimes come from other parts or the chest, and are very large, and are intertwined with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and each tumor is properly within its own side, as with the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these tumors are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some evil ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in that one which you see of good disposition in the touchwood, and is similar to the color of the chest, and moves from each part and is not attached to the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not deeply rooted; then it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrape off all parts, and stitch the two lips of the wound as we have said in abscesses of the head; and slowly and carefully, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that it does not leave a spacious cavity or tear, which the hands cannot reach, and do not look too early, before you cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	If you pierce the vein or artery, and it does not let you open it, then put in the wound vitriol broth, or some powders that stop bleeding, and close the wound; and leave it until the abscess is soothed, and the wound is healed, and then begin to poultice.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is clean, return to your work, until you complete it; then ask yourself if there are any small pustules remaining, and cut them and remove them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a great vein in the root of the pustule, then it is only necessary to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through, without causing harm; then fill the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat the wound.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire suppuration, it is necessary that you gather the two lips of the wound and hold them together, then since there is no excess due to the size of the suppuration.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cover the root of it with a poultice and draw out the pus, and hold it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those suppurations that contain excess, pierce where it is most dead; and pierce in such a way as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then apply bandages and similar things, so that it does not corrupt what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well covered, the cure of ointment encouraging char, until it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and said of the throat-cutter; but I have never seen one in our land, and it is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the furrow of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not help with this, because all the veins and the source of the evil are in those who have abscesses deeply in the mouth, or in the throat or in the lungs.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger of choking.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary to cut it out in three circles or four with a small cut across, between the two circles or by the amount of the cut through the cartilage; and those are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no char, and the vessel is long.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary to stretch the skin of the neck all around, then cut the throat until it reaches the windpipe; avoid the veins of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the cartilage, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the windpipe that jumps through the limb that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed during which we doubt the strangulation, gather both lips of the wound together, and cover it completely without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause blisters to rise until they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that we should not do this until the throat is completely stiffened, and the limbs are judged to be dead, and the defect has left.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Therefore, we cover the epiglottis because the limbs cannot remain, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death; and because they ordered the ancients to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew the wound and cure, as long as it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a dagger and put it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the arrow that had come out of it, and although she had not bled much, the blood was coming out through the wound in the throat.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and bandaged the wound, and healed it until it was healed; and she did not die, only her voice was affected, and she returned to normal afterward; because I believe that in the tissue of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large abscess in the color of a yolk, and is very common in women; and it occurs in two ways: natural and accidental; or naturally without a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental way is in two ways: one resembles a large boil, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from us through an artery; and it has fear, and it does not require to be opened except by a small needle, and the proof and search are made throughout the entire puncture: if you find it as in a large boil, and cannot open any vein, then cover it as one would cover a large boil, and take it all at once, if there is none; and look for it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is healed perfectly.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	We have many ways, of which I will say all the similarities; and now it is necessary for me to tell the difference between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that they are cold and feverish, until the boils have passed, and is accompanied by the purgation; then the fever and cold subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us, there is neither cold nor fever nor pain, and it contains the syphilitic pustule, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the skin, and begins like a small spot, and becomes large; and they are in two similarities, whether dry or moist, and many colors are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the care of a new patient, it is necessary to first test and examine them with an instrument called an "entromissoire", according to the form that follows in the chapter or treatise.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining abscesses among us is that you grasp or more moist skin than you pierce in the abscess, and turn your two fingers gently, until you feel that the instrument has reached the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the entromissoire, and be careful that it does not slip.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the wound is moist and has a certain color, make it so as I have said for the other abscesses; and if after the incision there is no more moisture, scrape off the fat, then cut it in a cross shape, and take pincers, and scrape lightly from every part and remove the skin where you think it is infected with the rot; and if you cannot remove it cleanly, tear it off in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, it returns many times; and if it lingers a little, and does not trouble you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and close the wound, and put on things that soothe abscesses, and treat other treatments until it is healed; and if the wound is large, cut out both lips of the wound, and treat what remains with char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if it is against you or another, if you are hurried and fill the wound with broken glass, let it remain for two or three days until the wound heals, and rest the exudation of blood; then return to the copper that was left behind.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See the forms of instruments used for extraction, and there are three ways: large and medium and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are also three ways: large, medium, and small, to extract the arrows from fistulas; and they are like the needles that one buys for sewing, and are made of brass, or iron, or silver, and are worth as much as those that are yellow, and are more effective for extracting splinters from fistulas; and they are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the size of the wound.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the needles are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are needles with two barbs in three ways; and if there are needles with three barbs, and they are also of three ways; and if there are needles with two barbs, and a needle of one barb alone, and they are also of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these that we make are sharp, and there are some that do not cut except from one part, so that we can peel the skin, because we do not cut the vein or the nerve; and these puncturing instruments are the needles returned in needles, so that the pain does not persist at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and never used is another tool small, resembling the scraper of pustules, according to this form, with which we drain blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is never put back in place that it should have been, and it does not heal the veins, and it does not heal according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never inflate the breasts of some men when they begin to rot, as if they were breasts of a woman; and they remain disfigured and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them should follow this form of this line from b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then scrape off the fat, and fill the wound with healing charcoal, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks down, and is softened because of its great size like in women, and if it is made into two pieces above, by similar cuts; so that one holds to the other at the end of each, so that the largest line contains the smallest according to this form, from this line b to the line g; then scrape off the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, because the pain does not want to rest, or because of the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with moistened corrosive cotton gauze; and let it remain until it removes the remaining fat and the fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of boils on the hips
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These boils that come from the hips are hard scrofula or have crusts, and they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the wound in the boil is emptied, apply old cotton to the wound and leave it there until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, then pierce them as we have said in puncturing scrofula, and if the wound remains open, then treat it with cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the bursting of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is burst and the skin above is bruised, then there are often abscesses, and also bleeding from the vein; and if one knows it is for the artery, then the abscess should be lanced longways; and when you feel it with your fingers, it is stretched; and when it is for the vein, it should be bled; and it is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is outside of the bones and joints and neck and mouth of other wounds, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid the fire cauterization, and the one who is in charge should also avoid it, and in the one who is swollen from arterial bleeding through the long skin; then open the belly as one would for an incision, and remove the artery until it is exposed; then insert a needle on the other side, and pierce it with another needle just as I showed you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples; then do not remove the thread that is between the two strands of an interweave until the wound is healed, and if the abscess is in the belly, it is necessary to stain the thread with what comes from the abscess on all the skin, then remove the needle from the thread that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and there should be two threads, so that you can pull it from the other side; then tie the abscess as I said, or the thread of one of the two parts of the needles at the incision of the first needle; and if you doubt that the thread will not hold, then take another needle all the way through the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four knots; then cover the abscess until the excess is gone, then cover the wound and leave what is tied; then put a piece of moist cloth on wine and oil, then treat the wounds and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just as abscesses come in the artery and the vein, abscesses also come to the neck when they are cut, or from too much hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And they often come to the helpers and the doors in all of them where there are joints, and that is very painful, and its color looks like the color of the blood, and it is in many positions with pain; and when it is extracted, if it pricks, and it is not in front of the skin, but outside the skin; and it moves from all parts, and does not go forward or backward, nor up or down, and those who are in joints do not usually cover them with iron: perhaps they contract; and those who are at the head or at the front, making the skin to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a point to a needle, and cut at its root; and if it is large, if it is suspended from the edge, and scrape, then bone, and stitch the wound at the seam, and cure until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never occurs in the belly and no other part of the body, and is a disease called "funge" by its resemblance to fungi, and has subtle roots, and large heads; and there are small and very large ones; and I saw the man who had two or belly that were more like funges than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were always moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one weighing eighteen ounces, and in the other six ounces, and the works in the incision is that you look if the hairs are moist, and the color of the arrowhead is white and moist and of subtle root; if the copper is large, and they are in your presence the fire cauterization.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in cutting often comes many great corruptions of blood, and if you see the hair extending and painful from the incision of the iron, then take the thread well made, and tie the arrow as we have said, and leave it two days; then restrain, and do not cease to stretch the thread through the arrow until it reaches the arrowhead, and cut through it with work; and if the roots are large, then pour boiling water directly onto the belly, but you put well boil the half, then cauterize that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cover the thread which is of pale color and poor sense and of little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	This is a swelling abscess, and I will come to treat chancres afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is bleeding heavily.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the wound is due to cauterization of a cut or puncture by a syringe, and it is above the belly and among some of the bruises, as in other wounds, or from blood that cuts veins or arteries according to what is in front, or from vomiting; and if it is due to the tearing of the syringe and the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from various sources.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the end of the intestine, then it is most diverse, and when one presses it to its two ends, it returns, and perhaps it is torn, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and for great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when one presses it with their hand, do not force too much; and if it is due to blood, it is open by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is filled with a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that one must look to see if it is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you must let go of the care.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bladder, then you must command the patient to color his linen, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the bed; then command him to lie still between your hands, then go around the limb that you have marked with a wide bandage, then stretch half of the abscess above the large muscle; then tie it around with a strong silk cord firmly, and let the intestine be loose; if you find the linen, then loosen it, and bring out the intestine from behind the belly; and if you find the bladder, then take it at the neck, and cut off the excess; and if the artery makes you contrary, or the vein, then go around carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and bring out two threads, and pierce the abscess with the two needles as you have done in cross that you will make percerate; then stretch the abscess into four parts above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the limb until it can bear weight, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or you cover it when it has become thin and rotten, then cure what is necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said; and strain the blood or the moisture that you have taken, then cure the limb as it is necessary, and soak the limb.
dou chancre	The first sentence "Dou chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	In the division of chapters, we have described the resemblance of chancre and how to treat it with medicines, and how to use iron in the cure. And we say that chancre is more dangerous when it is in the mouth or where it can be easily removed like chancre in the breasts, in the throat, and similar places. It should be completely removed at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not advisable to approach it, for I have never seen anyone heal from it; nor has anyone ever been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the work is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, you should once purge the pain of black bile; then if he has manifest repletion, bleed him, then wipe the pain from good bone to do the work; then pour your instruments or chancres, and the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow fully, and wipe well the place with your hand or something, and if the blood flows contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if it cauterizes so that the wound is not stained; then cure other cures until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	de droguegie
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	In the division of hydropsy, we have mentioned the resemblances of dropsy, and how the assembly of the acute is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment by medicines, and that which is treated by iron: if it is only eclites; and one should not touch with iron in these two resemblances: that is to say, tympanites and hyposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore, when you treat this resemblance of hydropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the treatment does not work, if you look at whether the pain is weak, or if he has another disease besides hydropsy, as vomiting and similar things; then do not touch with iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of great virtue, and he has no other disease but hydropsy alone, and he is not too young nor too old, then thus: gently raise the pain straight over your hands, and the ministers press the belly by bringing the acute to the lowest part of the least, then take the spatula in the shape of this:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And cutting of two parts, to the point, and ensure that no part is so thin that it can reach the intestines when thrown, and it cannot be bleached; then check if there is hydrops near the intestines: if necessary, cut off the third rib three inches from the spine on the right side; and if it is for the disease of the liver, then the incision should be on the left side of the third rib; and if it is for the gallbladder, then it should be on the right side, and it is not necessary that the hairs grow over the incision so that the excess does not run to the weakest liver; then cut through the skin with the instrument, and close it, and remove your hand from all the space between the skin and the gallbladder as if you were scraping at the quantity of an angle or around; then cut the gallbladder until the space reaches the desired length, and that is the edges of the wound, then remove this instrument with this form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	It is similar to a thin silver chain, and is made of light rain or iron, and has in its part below a small puncture; and on one side, three punctures; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and it is cut as if by a pen, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes make to cut the pen:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top of the chisel is the awl, so that when the instrument comes to the sharp edge, then lower it now above the instrument; leaving the half or the third part, because if you remove more than it should be in that hour, perhaps the patient dies from the resolution of his spirit due to the arm, or he becomes palsied, or he approaches death; but in accordance with the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease signify, and its hairs; then remove the instrument and retain the sharp edge, and it is retained now for the one who stops the puncture that is above the syringe, of which I have spoken, that you prick in this manner; then start the instrument again the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and take a small quantity from the sharp edge; do this every day, and keep from following as long as it does not remain but only a little sharpness.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the pain, and leave it much uncovered, then the cure of the sepulture or sand chafes, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and becomes tainted from drinking; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as they are healthy, and cauterize above the stomach and above the liver and above the spleen after the extraction of the splinter, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the removal of the staff
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child ever born who does not have a wart on the staff, or the wart is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to prick quickly, do not pierce at all points very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or pierce the thin cloth of the bottom, and tie it and tie him in this way for three hours or four, and when he wants to urinate, if possible, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not convenient, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those who are pierced with small holes, if they are treated with a thin cloth of the bottom, as we have said, it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the piercing in their leg are blinded, for no one is born with the piercing at the top of the penis, because it cannot urinate before its penis rises; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marsh, and it is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the hairs lie so that the pain lies on its back, and the head of the rod and the copper are like the width of a pen, so that the puncture is made in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the blood that often comes, and if it does, use the bandage that stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often come boils in the rod, and it is an ugly appearance; and there are both good and bad ones; if it is necessary to prick them with a thin needle, and cover and clean all of them, then put on moist cotton in Egyptian oil; then treat the ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the wound is malignant, of putrid color and fetid, then it is necessary to cauterize with fire.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the wound is deep, with part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary to remove the part inside first; and when it is clean, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, if the wound is not healing, and becomes darker and more corrupted, then it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the shells of green grapes and raisins, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood comes out, then apply the lunar cauterization according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizer is helpful in two positions: when blood comes out and when there is corruption; and if the tip of the rod is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to apply a piece of cloth soaked in piss on the wounds and urinate on them; and when the flesh is pulled out to the head of the rod which has not been circumcised before, or if it is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scorch it with the instrument until the sinews are loosened, and deliver the patient from the rod in all parts; and if this is a difficult matter to decide, then it is necessary to scorch it at the head of the rod and the skin, and then apply a thin layer of linen cloth soaked in cold water, so that it does not come out again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not one of the minor wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work by our own will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision in that time, and they all did it in one go; if it was lucky, there were two threads, and by chance if the thread on top and below detained the other, it would not hold.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	For the recovery, it is double the pain, and the wound healing is not always assured at the tip of the member; and the healing of the angle by chance escapes the iron, and corrupts the work, and often they are born in such a way that they have no need of healing and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the healing that is done by force to all the length of the thread, I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally in all the length of the thread; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and that the way of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he listens, that you only bind the thread around the rod as much as possible, and then throw it in all ways that you can; then put your hand straight on the rod, and gather the forces between your hands or outside your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then close your hand around the rod and blow gently, and take it up high until the part of the rod is clean; then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled, then tie the limb with a double thread, then tie it outside one to the other limb; and keep it as two by the second work to the pouch and to the docket index, and cover between the two limbs, then lift the gently and take the head of the rod; then let the blood flow little by little, for that is the most dangerous; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a poultice made of a piece of rag cooked in hasty pudding mixed with rose water, boiled with red wine and fresh, and leave it there until the other day, and the cure of another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces at the mutilation is as follows: both shoulders are tense and are stretched, and they are the same as the other hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the mutilation is when the knife goes inside the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it to your finger, in the same way that the other hand makes an abscess; and the copper equally, and if you cannot hold it to your finger, then hold it with tongs, and then the copper.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they pass for three days, and what is outside the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscess is healed, and scrape lightly; and if the copper can be moved, and you keep away from the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the limb of things soiled with wounds of powder, which we have said or treated for powders, and if one does too much care, it goes overboard, but it will not harm; cure therefore as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or blood frozen, or bowel, or a charred, or similar things that we have said in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see the retention by the stone which is high or col of the bladder, then it is necessary that the pain soaks up its knees; and its feet are put on the back, and its belly is stretched from the part above the back, and it restrains the pain as much as it can; and therefore the neck of the bladder is pressed above the stone, because the urine is released and; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the pain is great, then you must administer extraction to all the instrument which is called «siringue», of which this is the form: and it is made of thin silver hair, like the pen of an owl; and it is made of a palm length and a half, and subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie the head of the thread to the top of the linen or cotton pouch, and pull the head of the thread through the sling; and cover the excess of the linen and pull it up to the head of the sling, then oil the sling with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and the urethra and the wet cloth of oil and olive oil and vinegar; then press the sling heavily on the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra, then double the urethra upwards over the cloth; then pull the sling forward just above the cloth, and the patient feels the urine coming just above the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order except that the conductor or it goes twisted; then tie the thread at each end of the pouch and the urine follows the pouch, then remove it, and correct the urine; and repeat the sling until the bladder is empty and aligned with the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When skin or blood comes into the bladder, and putrefaction is present, and you see it distill acidic and medicinal substances, then use all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are passed through it so that the medicine can penetrate well to the end of the catheter, so that the moisture can be drawn out and put where necessary; and when you see your medicines entering the bladder, place the head of the syringe in the moisture, and draw from the drawing which is on the side; then draw the moisture into the syringe, and squeeze it strongly back onto the side; then the moisture will enter the syringe, and come to the bladder now, so that the painful sensations will be felt. And this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheters the bladder: if it is thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of archil, and is the highest of the two; and it is removed from the side where the joints are located; then take a bladder of sheep and put the moisture that you saw to cluster the bladder, then place it between the two breasts formed by a good double thread, and heat the poultice over the fire; then pour the head of the poultice into the stick, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture evenly, until the hairs feel that that moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then pull the thread strongly in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the dal, and put inside what you saw oil and moisture and vinegar, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with remedies; and I have said the difference between the arrow embedded in the rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one should open a hole; and in the bladder, and in the stick; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the arrow embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the sharp pain of the bladder resembles sharp pain in its subtlety; and if one opens it, there is great pain and much bleeding, and it can happen many times, and then it returns; and at most of these pains, the foundations; and it is light for the healing of children up to the age of four, and it is very grievous in old people, and is constant in those who are between young and old; and it is a lighter cure for those who have the arrow large, than for those who have it small.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, it is first necessary to cleanse the wound with chalk, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders one from seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the wound by the feet, and stand it upright and move it away from the body, so that the stone descends to the edge of the feces, and never once rises above the thigh; then place it between your hands and clean it, and your hands should be away from the thighs, so that the feces is entirely declining downwards; then take it out and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut across the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not cry out at the slightest touch, then moisten your right index finger with oil from your right hand, if the pain is sharp, or your middle finger, if the pain is dull; and press it into her foundation, and cut into the stone, and when you feel it at your finger, then apply it to the neck of the bladder; then press upwards, and cut away where you see it tailor-made.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the midwife to press the bladder with her hand, and command her to extend her right hand to the uterus above, and her left hand to remove the skin that is outside the uterus in the part where the incision is made; then cut the spatula-shaped, from which it is formed:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And making an incision between what is between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but on the right side of the naval; and let it be straight above the stone, and your knife at the foundation or the bottom, and let it be like a slit that is wide by default, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure of the knife that is at the foundation, that it would jump out without effort; and if there is a stone where it is at the foundation, let it be sharp to cut out; and if there is a part that is soft, like a glass, and rounded, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	When there are angles and margins where it is, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump, then it is necessary to strain it with nails that are as thick as a lime at the head, to prevent the stone from escaping; or you can use a subtle hook bent at the head; and if you cannot engage it in this way, then enlarge the opening slightly, and if there is no decortication, then strain it with vinegar; and if there are more than one stone, then first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then remove the small ones afterward if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is very large, then it must be cut larger, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the wound: either it dies, or the urine comes out through the place where the wound cannot heal; but all the while you try to draw, or to tear with pincers, until you tear it into pieces; and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put a moist cloth on top of the oil and wine, or oil and vinegar and cold vinegar, to soothe the abscess; then re-sew the wound on its own side, and do not remove the bandage until the next day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you reset it, the joint of oil and vinegar rises very well, then treat with ointment and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscess comes into the wound and corrosions, and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, which is known in a similar way as without any urine: then put your hand on the wound, and extract that blood, because if it remains, it will rot the bladder, and damage it; then lift the wound with vinegar and salt and oil, and help it in all ways that you can, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the remedies that you cure it with, that you tie the two thighs, and gather the medicines above the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the arrow is small and it is conducted with a stick, and tied up, and the urine cannot come out; then the cure that I have said before, that you cut many times, is to excuse the cutting for this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this already.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take a piece of iron in this form and be at three angles tied up in one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie the arrow around the stick outside of the bladder, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then lightly beat the iron on the stick until it reaches the arrow; and gradually turn the iron in your hand on the arrow until you can pierce the arrow from the other side; if the urine comes out immediately, then press your hand above where the part that is remaining inside the stick.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is currently broken, and has sprung with the urine, and is sharp to the limbs; and if you cannot do this for any reason, then tie a thread below the stone and the other above, then make the rod in the right place between the two threads, then pull it out, and release the thread, and clean the clotted blood that is in the wound; and cure until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone from women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is rarely any stone in women, and if it ever occurs, the cure is difficult, and is prohibited for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well versed who will expose herself to shame, specifically when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that if the woman's stone is more forward than the man's, because it should be cut deeper, and there is great pain involved. And if necessary, you should send for a woman who is well-skilled, and point out to her what to do, and if you cannot find one, then you must perform the operation yourself with great subtility; and present a clean needle in the vagina of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command during the examination of the stone; and look very closely to see if the woman is virgin: therefore, it is necessary to put on gloves and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she must push it out of her body, and recommend that she push it out or with pain, and press her right hand firmly against the vagina.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she move it from great to great from the entrance of the anus until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut above the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle part where it is muddy and stained, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her arm above the stone or away from it, and let the tailor make a small opening in the belly, if you feel the stone so sharp that the wound can be opened as soon as the stone can be removed, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round and with rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you recognize the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if you do not know, put the similar stone in vinegar for an hour until the pain is gone; then return to your work, until the stone is softened, and have the tools that I have told you about in the extraction of the stone for you to help in your work; and if you do not know, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the wound and bandages and bendles, and do not start again, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, lest by chance the patient die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood is calmed, and the wound has healed, return to your work, until the stone is fully formed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cause
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than the assembly of moisture or white smegma, which is outside the foreskin, which contains the urine; and it is called "smegma", and never properly in the skin of the other urethra, if one cares that it is not there.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this smegma is due to weakness that comes from the foreskin, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes if it comes from percussion on the ribs, and this moisture has many colors: whether it is declining to yellow, or without red, or black, or aquous white, and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white and facial as we have said, then it is the abscesses that we have mentioned, and if it is short and does not open the ribs, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in its own cloth, then it is the abscesses that we have mentioned with a part of the egg, and because one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the ribs and the white facial, then it feels bad; therefore when you see the color of the moisture, try all the previous forms.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introduction, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary to clean the hairs according to the power and the replacement of its body; then place it on its back, on something slightly elevated, and cover it with much cloth; then bend over its right side, and command the minister to bend over its left, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the sternum; then take the spatula and scrape the skin of the ribs from long to above the knuckle, and let your cut be straight in dividing the skin of the ribs up to the white face, and scrape the thin skin according to the power; then pierce the white plain with a sharp and wide cut, and extract all the sharpness, and then put your forceps, and press the white face above; and do not touch the sternum, but only the white face; scrape all or in pieces carefully the ribs of it subtly, if you do not scrape it well, it will return to the sharpness; and if the broken bone jumps to your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white face; then gather the two flaps of the sternum to one seam, then treat it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you trust the broken bone has been corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then cut off the coagulum from all the suspended parts, and extract the bone, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the sharp object is assembled in two parts together, which are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound some ground cloves in rose oil; and put underneath another layer of ground cloves in wine and oil, and put over the two coagulums, and put doubled cloths on top, and tie it all together to the body according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and place them with flaxen linen according to this likeness and assemble them by sewing at the girdle of the breeches, and one of them grasp the pain above the buttocks, and the other at the part of the elbow; and the other two head above the two angles, and all assembled the restriction in the loop of the breeches; and never is this branch of cautery in the form of an iron tail, and it is that you grasp one cautery needle finely, and cop it on the skin of the belly, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus that contains the acid is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and perforate that pus with a thin cautery, and the skin with this subtle cautere:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be careful that the knife does not touch the bone; and cleanse this work so that it is safer; and guard against bleeding from the wounds, and guard against the work of the saw; and if nothing goes against you, such as an abscess or bleeding or other thing, then cure what goes against you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the wound is not severe, and does not wish to undergo this work for its horror, then use perforation, as I have told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that aquous matter is laid, then place the wound on the highest seat; then perforate the abscess at the part where it is not connected to anything, and put the perforation at the longest point of the body; and make the pores wide so that all the sharp corre flows out; then put cotton on the wound and tie it, and leave for the remaining sharp matter to come out, then treat the wound until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the sharp matter to come out of the wound mouth, then it is necessary that you go in with a pen or the instrument used to treat hydropikes, because its form is as mentioned before; and expand the wound, and make sure that the sharp matter returns, and is assembled after six months or within fourteen days, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the wound will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of abscesses of the kidneys
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In the section of this branch, there are many positions that cause fear in many people, which seems to me to be better left alone; and I will tell you about the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the kidneys and immediately to the kidneys; and this is due to many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know by excessive acid and ague, which is spread to the kidneys or from impact; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the blood; and there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess; and perhaps some gray and yellow abscesses, and of pus color, and never comes from an artery or vein inflammation.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the high placement of an abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should only be touched there.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who are made of opening a vein are known by their placement at the gentle touch of the fingers, and can often make the incision above this resemblance, and on other parts; and it is that you should care for the cures of the wounds, then the eye is raised high, and the thread from the white surface, and deliver the suspended part from all parts of the eye.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the vein is already filled with these threads, then it should be incised, and the wound cared for; and if it is under the skin, or in the fluid within the vessels, then it should be completely removed, and the wound rounded properly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the shoulder blade is dislocated at its back, it is necessary that you cover it all, and straighten the neck, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your surgeries are completed, apply the wound with soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then use other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a kind of abscess enclosed in an envelope similar to a bursa, with the softening of the groin, and the painful movement of the limbs; and the treatment of this disease is as difficult as the previous one, and therefore we will tell you about its surgery, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary to make the dislocated part sit on the seat raised high, then lift the suspensory ligament of the tendons down to your fingers, and all the veins that are close to the thigh, and scrape the masters, and extend them properly; then cut with a sharp knife across the wide part of the veins, as much as they are uncovered, and then scrape from every part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in temples; then take an needle or double-threaded needle, and tie it to the first limb where the blood came from, and tie it at the other end; then place them straight in the middle of the body, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture; then cure the wound as the others are treated with ointment, so that none of the veins become inflamed; for by this no harm comes, and if all the veins come out, it is necessary to pull the veins from all the limbs; so that the patient does not lose his circulation due to the incision of the veins, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the toothache
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The causes of this branch are from the section that comes out or from the extension over the belly in the part of the angles, because the intestines descend from that toothache to one of the kidneys; and this toothache is either from the section or from the extension of it, and these two methods come from many causes: from shock, from jumping, from noise, or from lifting heavy weight, and similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of the toothache, are that it is painful and painful in a long tension, and does not come suddenly; and it is equal to the kidneys towards the front, because the toothache approaches the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it comes to the cutting of the abscess, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and has various apparances outside the skin, and is for the end of the intestine and the heart because of the cutting of the abscess.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines are torn with the wounds, and they are retained inside, and cause great pain to suffer in the abdomen, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cases of iron, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of the work is that you command or make the patient roll up the intestines with their hand inside the wound, if they can push them in; then place the neck above and between your hands, and release the fingers; then put the chest above, and cover all the skin of the belly with oil; then drive out the pus that has collected under the white skin that is outside the belly skin, until all the pus can come out; then scrape the abscess that is outside the belly skin, so that all the white skin is removed from all parts; then drive out your index finger in the direction of the belly, between the white skin that is outside the belly skin and between the second white skin, and behind the belly, and between the second white skin; and move the abscess with your left hand inside the belly skin, and place the white skin in your right hand above, and release the belly from all over the lower part of the belly; and command the assistant to stretch the belly up, and remove everything that is behind the bandage; and if you find anything, drive it into the belly through the back; then take a needle or a thick thread made of twelve strands of wool, and drive it into the back part of the abscess, which is outside the belly skin; then cover the threads with oil, and tie them together in the shape of a cross, and tie the abscess, which is outside the belly skin, with a strong thread of two strands; then cover the threads with oil, and tie them together in two strands, so that none of the wool that grows can enter into openings, that an abscess does not form; and finally tie the first thread according to the first thread, and leave the great thread which is outside the belly skin the length of one finger; and then the other according to the round shape that the belly has; then cover the part that is outside the belly skin with oil, and the bandage, as we have said before; then apply a soft cloth soaked in oil to the wounds, and apply the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never cauterize the white pustule that we have mentioned after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this has often happened, and let the wound remain until it heals through it; and if it takes too long to settle, then apply hot vinegar on top of what we have said, until it heals; then treat the wound with other treatments, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carbuncle
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made as the branch that is together with the viscera, in a similar way that you tie the vessels, after the incision lightly above; then cover over, and treat the abscess with what works, until the vessels heal; and the cure as we have said, until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No tearing or anger ever comes, as we have said, and open the wounds; and let no one pull out any of the intestines with their fingers, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour; and in any case, if it remains too long at this point, the wound or the syphac believes that the intestine is pulling out; and this happens by the extension of the syphac which is at the tears, as we have said, because it is extended, then it is softened and inflated the wounds and open; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and in this way no cure is done: and it is that the pains are squeezed between his back between your hands, then cover the tear enflamed according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphac which is outside the skin that the skin is on, then take the right and put it on the wound of the syphac; and press on the front of the belly, then cut the two wounds according to the syphac on the head of the right, and both; then extract the head of the right, and do not cover the syphac or extend the belly or other things, as I have told you in the cure of the intestines; then cure by the cure of the wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the hair, if it is damaged, heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The wound is constricted, and does not appear to be ruptured, and the cauterization is quiet in this place, and more proximal to the healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the boots
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the boots is softened in some men, because the char inside is softened, and it can be seen; and it is important, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the wound lie on its back, and cut the softened leather above the natural leather; then bring the two edges together at a seam, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened leather at three or four stitches firmly; then sew between the seams, and cure it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	with great care
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	It is commendable to act with great care in our law, and for this reason I would like that I not speak of it much in this book; and it is necessary only for two ways: the one is that the patient responds truthfully when asked, and to cure with great care; and the other, because we often have need of careful handling of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rabbits and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that careful handling is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that which we do by attraction, make the animal sit in high heat, until the sinews are softened and held; then take them in your hand, until they are returned and you do not feel them anymore.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the treatment of hip: it is necessary to apply the beast, and press the skin of the thighs with your right hand, then tie the suspensory, and cop over each bone at the top, when you have well burned them; and leave no pus or subtle pus that is on the bones; and this method of treatment is more effective than that made by attraction, because by attraction something from the thighs remains, by which the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	For the treatment of hermaphrodites:
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is in two ways as men: one is that between the two thighs open as the shape of a woman according to nature, and sometimes they have hair, and sometimes they do not urinate.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And in women, it is done by placing a finger under the nipple as if holding a wand and two fingers above.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of the mouth and the female parts is that you remove all infected tissues and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine sprays from the skin of the penis, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tenting is an infected tissue above the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary to clean the excess of the tentigenous matter from your hand or fingers, and wipe it lightly; and not alter much too soon, because blood does not come immediately, then cure other cures until they are healed; and in another char that is born at the mouth of the marsh, and use it, and by chance it jumps up, and it is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this reason they called the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to clean it as we have said the tentigenous matter, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	of error
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of a woman is not clearly perceived, or the cause is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental by disease that has come to her; or it is due to charm applied, or subtle, sharp, or clever, and it is made from within the marriage, or the cost, or outside, or whatever; and they prevent conception, and pregnancy, and possibly the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is by the look of the body.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the symptoms are close at hand, then you should do it yourself or ask someone else.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a delicate and subtle case, and it is close to the two thighs, then hurry, and do as follows: bring your two index fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two thighs, until the delicate and subtle case is removed, and is over the stomach; then take linen, and moisten it in oil, and place it on the leg, and grind the woman against a hard surface every day, so that she cannot move.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the case is hard and sharp, it is necessary to use a copper spoon similar to a leaf of mint.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is from a charred wound, if it is lifted and covered with a cloth; and have the medicines to stop bleeding, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and abundant amount of honey; then apply a large piece of clean cloth, so that the wound does not stick together; and thus it should be long, and cover it with a tent of dry linen; then treat other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the marsh there is a charred wound, if it should be covered like this, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that is in the marsh, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that do not usually bleed, and when hemorrhoids become old, they become thrombosed; and we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that require treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I said that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when they are present in the marsh, and do not appear until felt, are treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that can be felt at the edge of the marsh are those that can be treated.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then stretch the thrombosed vein with pincers, and cut off its root, then powder with restricting medicines such as acacia and sulfur and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then place her in cold water; and if there is any blood that comes out, sit her in a decoction of sumac and peel of green pomes and gall nuts and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and mix with honey and egg, and make an ointment on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if he is stiff, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply cupping glasses to his back and breasts without causing harm; then take the limb, and moisten it with juice of plantain or of aglanthe mixed with old wine, and apply to the joint.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is ready to burst, treat the limb with poultices until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a harsh sore, if you cover it as I have said for thistle; and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marsh
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come in the marsh, such as chancre and pustular abscess and herpes and esthenomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and chronic abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the chapter.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary to tell in this treatment of the chronic abscess that comes in the marsh, which is not one of the abscesses that come quickly; and if you know how to use iron, look at the abscess to see if it is red at the beginning of its appearance, and if it has fever and chills, and if it becomes red.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore do not rush to pierce, but make him wait until the pain is eased; then place the misaligned part on a seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and support it on its back and gather its feet to the sides of the leg; and let his knees be spread, and put his arms away from his hips, and tie them well with a good belt; then bring him the spatula used to open the mouth of the marsh, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you see this tool being applied, you check the depth of the marsh, so that what enters into the tool does not go further than it should, and that it does not injure the misaligned part; and if the tool is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the tool does not hurt it; and it is necessary for him to put the horn of the tool on top, and stain the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is done by hand, if it needs to be covered at the head, cover it with a sponge soaked in rose oil or dry green oil; and place the tent of the wound at the front of the marsh, and place above the marsh and above the other clean moist cloth boiled in hot water or vinegar; then after two hours of boiling, when the patient is healed, continue boiling until they are healed; and never raise the marsh and the wound by a poultice of hot water and honey, and then with hot water or roots of lilies and aristolochia long soaked, then reapply the boiling.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is set in the marsh, it is necessary that you guard against cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The midwife is first to the bed when she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman approaching, and desires to smell the ar: then hasten the child to issue; then scrape that childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly his belly, so that the child issues quickly; for when it goes over its head, the second is with it, and is drowned in the marsh of its superfluities by good cleaning; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it never comes up from its feet, and comes up the back or the shoulder, and the hands, or it comes up over its belly, or sometimes, and is turned over on its own collar, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the bailiff that she be wise and subtle in these things, and if she is deceived and disappointed, and I will show you all the figures how to help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes up through its head by natural issue, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and her strength is weak, then let the midwife sit on a seat, or let the women hold her; and apply to her nature oil of olive or fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife between her two little fingers the smallest spatula of which there is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and pierce the second joint, and hold it at its angle until the moisture that is inside has been removed; and take the woman's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not, then you must apply a cataplasm of fenugreek with sesame oil to the woman's genitals; then let her chew and spit out the mixture for an hour: if this is now effective, the child will be born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If both hands are dislocated, it is necessary to reset them very gently; and if they cannot be put back in place, then you must make the woman sit on a chair, and raise her legs up; then remove the chair from under her, and wipe the woman, so that she does not faint at the raising; and if the hands still cannot be put back in place, and the child has died, then you must reset them at the hip joint which was previously dislocated, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes onto its feet, it is necessary to put it up high; then turn it gently and gradually, until it is level; then grasp both feet and extend them gently and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up suddenly, command it to hold still, and make it spit out the contents of its mouth; if it jumps far, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, turn it gently and gradually, until it is in the natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it is completely straight.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come out as we have said, take muscle powder from high altitude, and oil of sage, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside of this ointment, then make her sit in high temperature until just outside the ribs; and when she is softened outside, make her a collar of mustard, and put it on, and let it stay for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, for the child is born now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, place your hands gently and gently; then lean it on its neck, and hang its feet down, and lie it on the bed; gently fold your hands, and then grasp its hands on its belly, and remove the blankets from it, until it is clean below; and if the child does not cry, take its feet and gently move them, then gently move its belly upwards, then close your hands; and feed the child gently; and command the woman to hold it until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It is necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman, and go; if she cannot go, then lie her on the bed, and bend her legs; then alleviate the muscle that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, then sit her on a chair, then study to bring back the hand; and when the child is according to the natural figure, and make it suckle, and command that she breastfeed until the child is full.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother's
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the patient to wash their hand, then turn it back and forth gently; and when it is even, if there is a muscular spasm of high and oil, as we have said, then command her to move slowly; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to hold it tight; and make her spit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, for all the other fingers.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to doing this with all the other fingers, if the second finger can be bent at your angle, as long as the moisture is drained; and if it is stuck upwards towards its face and neck, then bend it downwards, so that it is not held, and break the bone; then push the child inwards, until you have put it back in place, and command the woman to hold it tight: then gently move it.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the discharge of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is often the case that twins are born, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; and this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	It is an uncommon thing, and they do not live long, unless they are multiplied; I know that they are devised by the syphilitic disease, which is joined to the womb; and sometimes they come out as naturally as one at a time, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born gently, as the cure as we have said, and if the placenta is subtle, and it does what it does quickly and lightly; and do so that it is worthwhile for health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None of them are formed in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or more than fifteen years, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise doctor, and it is fitting that the bailiff should know all this, because by chance similar things may happen; so do according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When caring for the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and if nothing comes out, and you are forced to handwork; it is fitting that you should know whether the woman is of healthy virtue and has no accident or fear of death; it is fitting that the woman be laid on her back, and her arms inclined downwards, and her legs raised; then the midwife applies two fingers, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated with the extraction of the child; then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oils and mustard and seeds of linseed, then the midwife applies her hands to these oils and mustard; then she lightly inserts them into the woman's mouth, then if she swallows the fingers that are convenient for her, and if the child is discharged above its head; if she does not discharge it, then insert the fingers in her eyes or on her neck or in her mouth or in her palate or behind the beard or on the chin or on the sides, and if the child discharges above its feet, then apply it to the chest or the back; it is fitting that she ties the finger to her right hand, and places the tube between her left hand's fingers, and she squeezes all her hand lightly, and inserts the finger in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another bone, where the joint is located, so that the extraction is equal; and then place it equally by moving from one side to the other, to make it move, and hold the bones together as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, apply some of its oil to the affected area, and push it into that part, and remove the other part; and if none remains, place this bone or higher up the limb, and keep moving until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by the pressure, then you must wrap it around the injured part until it all comes out; then place it in the joint of the foot or the elbow, and so you must do in the other hand and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	If the head of the child is large and it is difficult to extract at birth, or if the neck is too stiff, it is necessary to use a hook-shaped instrument between your fingers, and by pulling the neck and straightening it; or you can use an instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and thus the same thing should be done in the case of a child born with a natural curvature of the neck; and then remove the bones with pliers, and if the head is stuck, it should be forced out with forceps, until the blood that has issued is stopped; and if it cannot be extracted, it should be cut off in pieces as much as possible; and if it is inflated in the belly or outside the ribs, it is necessary to pierce it until the blood flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	If it is hanging above its feet, then it is lightly pulled, and the marrow at the base of the tongue is also light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If it is stiff in the belly or the groin, it is recommended that you pull it out with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and when the belly or groin is opened, remove all the moisture until there is none left; and if other members are also broken, and the patient remains conscious, then hold his hand in front of the tongue, and pull it back to the mouth of the tongue; then bite down once or twice, and then pull it out; and if the mouth of the tongue is retracted due to an abscess that has formed, do not force it, but instead administer moist and greasy things; and apply wet and soothing dressings, and keep them in a cool, softening, and moistening state.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the shoulder is dislocated above its place, and you can put it back in place, as we have mentioned in the living child; and if there is no way to do so, then break the bone and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, as we have mentioned in the abscesses that come in the marsh; and if blood comes out, it should be applied with high pressure, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had died, then consulted the other with this one, and the other died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, some abscesses formed in the throat, and they swelled so much that they burst, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I went to the doctor, and he thought for a long time, and could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong adhesive, and some bones stuck to it, and after a while, others did as well.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, because the belly does not have bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I looked at the wound, and in it were many bones, until the woman was better; and the woman thought for a long time like this, and it was held together with a little bit of bandage from the belly; and I had not remembered this chapter before because when masters find an unusual thing, they do not know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	bring the marsh back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the presser, with which we open the books; and to the second returns to the second questions of the two joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and should be made of brass or wood; and the mouth of the funnel should be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees should be one palm and a half long; and between the two joints should be two wedges of this same size, which are firmly pressed in on both sides, half a palm or more long; and these two wedges are inserted into the mouth of the marsh when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, which appears more subtle and lighter, should be made of flat iron or wood, according to the appearance of pliers; and it should have two prongs, as you see, one palm long, and two wide; and when you want to open the mouth completely with the instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet together and her legs spread apart, then push the two prongs together into the mouth, and hold the head of the instrument between her teeth; then work your hand with the instrument equally, according to the amount you want to open the mouth of the patient, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These tools are all above, and they are multiplied in their similarities; and when the one sees them matched, the more hurried the work, and the higher the price for them by their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the tool that you have not matched, for their need is not excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second instrument is retained in childbirth, it must be commanded to the pain that she holds her breath, and then the faith is expelled from the condition, and both hands are held to the mouth and nose; and if she sneezes through it, well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centaury; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled over the fire; then put a cloth or covering in the pot, and the other in the mouth of the marsh, and let it sweat until the vapors come into the mouth; then make him spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second attempt fails.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and is not better, command the bath attendant to moisten her right hand with oil of sesame or mussel oil, and then put it in the natural position, and try the second attempt; and when she has found it, grasp it and extend it gently and correctly, so that the marsh does not tear at extraction; but it should be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pull; if it comes out and disappears.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the bouche of the marris is strained, we have said the cure of expectoration, and fumigation of herbs; and if she does not have all that we have said, then guard that you do not follow the advice; but it is necessary that what is at the bouche of the marris, that you tie to the neck of the woman, then clinderize with the ointment tetrafarmaçon; if she will bear and remit, and come again healthy; but nevertheless, when she will bear if it comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and bleeds the pain.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary to use inconvenient fumigations for this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman during retention of flowers and the second part is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is similar to a needle, and one puts the head subtly into the nature, and the ones wide above the fire; and the smoking is over the charcoal, and the lice until they are destroyed, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not pierced the foundation, but it has been stopped by some subtle swelling: therefore one must then apply a lance to that swelling at its proper angle, and do not pierce too deeply, and cover the wound so it does not touch it; then put on a soft cloth with wine and oil, then the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, put or plug a splint, and let it remain for some time, and let it be bandaged as the child wishes to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes this swelling of pus from a wound or an abscess; if it covers the wound: if it is treated, as we have said of the splint.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodular and thicker than those that come from above the foundation, or in the space between the two parts, if there is one fistula or more; and when this nodulation is ancient, it works, and becomes moister with white or subtle pus, and these fistulas are never cured; and they are known by the fact that there is egestion or ventosities when the pain makes egestion, and perhaps some verses.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pass through the bladder, and through half of the penis; and they reach the joint of the hip, and through the anus.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula passing through the base, and not passing through: and it is that you prick your index finger or base, and insert a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has twisting, if you insert a thin tent of lead, or horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair at your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no perforation egestion, ventosity, or ver, as we have said: saiches that it does not pierce through; then hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persistent near the bladder or near the urethra, if it allows urine to pass, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is perforated near the coccyx, then the tendon comes from the bone; if there is no twisting and the location of the pain is not clear, then it is that it is attached to the bone, and there is no healing by medicine or by cauterization; and in these persistent fistulas, there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of those who try.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and not ancient, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the pains are hidden between your hands on its back; and the legs are raised up to its knees, and its knees are bent towards its belly; then bring a tent of lead, or tin if there is twisting, until you remove the tent.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain around the base, then you should insert your index finger, feeling as if you are pushing through the skin; and if you sense between your fingers the sinew or bone, then cut it off; if not, do not force it, as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	It is possible to heal almost anyone, but this rarely happens; and the aid that is done, it is as if you heat the subtle cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before; and bring all of it out through the fistula, until it comes near the base; and do this two or three times, until you see that these charred parts are burned away, which are similar to an arrowhead; then treat the wound with ointment, until those charred parts are gone, then treat the wound with a poultice of herbs.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is otherwise healthy, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is not otherwise healthy; and if he has an abscess between his fingers, and does not pierce it at its base, and between his finger and the abscess a thick covering of charcoal or sawdust, and you see the fistula pointing towards the covering of the cure; if the copper of the beginning of the fistula, and before the covering, and then the cauterize after, until it reaches the top of the covering; and he will be delivered from the abscess, and closed; then wash away those charred pieces that seem like a quill of an eagle, and none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you cannot remove it, and cut between yourself and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauterization assembles two things: to wit, the burning of these charred pieces, and the stopping of blood and the removal of moisture; then cure tents boiled in butter or in broken chocolate, until the wound is filled with the burned pieces, and the charred pieces are in the wound; then cure the wound of soaking bandages with hard charcoal, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes from the foundation, and is far from the body, and if you push your thumb or foundation, and inquire within.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there are two threads or sutures or charcoal near where it is about to pierce, if there is no other way than hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three methods: whether you cauterize as we have said, or you cut just above the foundation, or if you can put tents and cure as before; and do not move too much in front, so that you do not cover the tenant who holds the foundation, and bring the excretions out through the way of willingness; then cure it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and wipe it clean after it is cut above the foundation, or by tent or other appointed instrument; then clean the char that is in the wound, as much as you can; then strive to restore the wound and to delay the fistula in the part before the foundation: if there is a lighter thing to the pain.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are made in this way: and when you push the tent into the fistula, it is where it costes on the foundation below the skin above, then take a tent perceived at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And if you push the thread into the fistula, and push the tent along the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is not in the margin of the foundation within, then push the thread of that which is perforated, so that you push your other or foundation; and take the head of the thread, and bring together the two parts together, and hold one against the other, and leave it for a day or two; and do not restrain it once, until the thread covers those which are between the two, and heal; then cure the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, then I will perforate it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too deeply seated.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not matter to make the adjustment overly deep if it is deeply seated, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny backbone from which the fistula is made should be much and of one piece, part and branching; on the other hand, not, because we do not know what we should not know, as you see here:
des emorroydes	desmorroids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: those that are inside the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they have blood, and there are one or more, and they are deficient in the foundation and at the base of the foundation; but those that are deficient have little moisture, and are covered with a little sharp orange or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh; and the treatment of those inside the foundation is that you command the patient to sweat so he can go to other rooms, as long as the foundation is full, and they open; if you hurry, and you can hold them with pliers, or you hold them with your finger, then you cut at their roots; and if they cannot be held by their moisture, take them to the cloth, or to the cotton, or a piece of cloth; and hold them in your two hands, then cut, and powder over some hot powders that are in the cauterant; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterants, so they are treated with other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundation cannot come out, clean the patient with a rough cloth to wash what is inside the foundation, so it can come out openly; and if the hemorrhoids swell, and the filaments are full of the foundation, then the treatment is light; and it is that you hold them with your finger or with pliers, and cut, then treat as we have said, until they are healed, and do not fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to stitch the wound according to this method: take a thread of twisted hair, and bend it into an needle, and then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needle, and if it is too wide; and straighten the thread formally, then loosen the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave one to let the excess blood out; then put above the wound a cloth moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and put above the wound, and command the patient to rest; and then let him rest until they are healed, and when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other treatment, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dryly and without moisture at the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	often occur in the intestines due to constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to reset at the point of a spatula or at your angle, which does not allow moisture; then treat it as it should be while it is dry; and if it cannot be treated, then begin the scraping more forcefully than before until it is healed, and then scrape; then treat it as it should be while it is clean.
dou fremit	dry heat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Mice are a small appearance found at the back, and it moves quickly; and sometimes it finds the bone, and one feels like fever, and it spreads throughout the body, and more so in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a needle of a goose quill, or a needle of a vulture very strong, and place that needle on the fever, until the circle pressing the fever all around; then turn your hand to all the needle so that you cover all around the fever, and pull it forward, and extract the fever from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make a thorn of a needle of rain or iron in this form, and be subtle to remove and bring up:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Never pierce, to hold the two together, and press it. And if you see, if cauterize the wound, as it is before or in the chapter of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of this ointment
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never made an ointment of silver or copper, or lead melted or crushed; and never made of these small and large instruments, according to those which they are accustomed to use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those which they should use in the care of children and those who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large ointment is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And if there is a dislocation where the belly is twisted, as you see, and the ribs are broken on one side and one on the other; and the belly is filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and there are small holes all around, and between each hole there should be one inch of space, then pull on these holes with a strong thread, and tie the belly together as if it were a goat; and when the medicine is inside, if the ribs are broken by an instrument before a strong thread, then suture them like a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with a cloth of oil or a similar thing, then gently apply it; then the assistant applies it to both hands together, until it is all visible, then remove the cloth, and relieve the pain in his legs, and if the swelling wants to come out, let it come out as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you apply the cloth in the illness of diarrhea of the belly, and the medicine wants to come out, then restart it as long as it is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the thorn is in the foundation or abscess, it should be removed as delicately as for a child; and this is the form of the delicate removal above with the skin being stretched:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different depending on how they are made, and depending on the limbs or wounds that are made, and for what reason they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by being pierced with a spear, and cut with a sword or dagger, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the limbs of the body, such as a wound that occurs above the neck, or on the head, or the arm, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members; and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the remembrance will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	When a simple wound comes or the bone is not broken, be careful if it is a piercing or similar things, and if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly of an abscess: if you do it immediately cleanse the head itself if there is little blood from the wound, and cleanse the opposite side if the wound is large; and avoid the pains of repletion of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he does not want to cleanse, let him eat light food, and do not drink wine, and do not change his diet; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in sterilizing wine; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder that I will say a little later; and if the wound has been moved, put on some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a spear wound and similar, and the lips cannot be sewn together by tenting, then sew them together by stitching, as I will say about belly wounds, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, and can be moved, but only held by a little, then cover it with a copper; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore flesh in place of skin, and command the patient to eat soft foods, such as meat and bread, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you remove or cut off the skin entirely, and there is no bone, then cover the whole with copper, and pour in foul matter, then treat it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting it, and it cannot be stanched by medicines, then tie the artery, and if you remove the arrow, then tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put in this powder that boils as soon as the wound comes into contact with it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; fresh chalk three parts, and the powder finely ground, and fill the wound, and bind it tightly, until it has healed well and joined to all its skin; then bandage it well, and leave it untouched, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one should never use chalk alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the wound has not been moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound has moved, immediately apply this powder; but if it has not moved, place some ointments digested with onions or poultices of flour of barley made with honey and water, until it is healed; then treat with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the broken bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then strain it with fine needles; and I will tell you about the main fractures afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and the main fracture, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is a bone, there is no other method than to let the care, and not put anything restricting, because it hurts bones and makes them retract; and do not put anything sharp on the wound, for the substance of bones is cold, and its continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be gentle, as wine washed in hot sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and the cloth washed in hot sweet water, and other stones of this manner, and gently moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bandage it and treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	If the wounds are deep and the bone is exposed and filled with pus, then drill or go deeper into the bone; and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then drain it, and clean it, and cauterize it as necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut, or the wound is deep, and the vein is exposed, keep it away from the meat as it goes down the side of the neck, and do not touch the neck but put it back according to its natural shape; then slowly tighten it, and leave it for some time, then cure dressings as long as they are healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, try to remove them all, and those that you cannot remove, leave until the wound can heal and be aligned; and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if he has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of arrow or of dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound of arrow or of dagger, and the wound is deep, look to see if from the wound there is ventosity that the hairs are all out: cut then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh at all its blood, do not put in the first hour the powder, or the bandage for the blood that it does not stick to the flesh, and return to the heart, and occlude the pain; but put attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put in the wound old cotton to draw out the moisture, and make the pain sleep on the wound three times a day, or four, or more; then there will not be any spasm, nor trembling of the heart from anything else; and when you see the good dispositions, cut that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds and other treatments until they are healed; and if they cannot be healed and worked on, then create a fistula; as the cure should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, or pierced through the front or back, then treat as the cure for what is in front; if it is large, stitching; and if it is small, powder, and if it has been pushed into the bone, and has broken off pieces, then apply to the wound, and remove any foreign bodies if they are necessary; and if they are not necessary, let the wound rot, so that it will align with the extraction; and for other wounds in other limbs is according to judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	belly rupture
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is large and medium and small; from the great wound, once the intestines or the nerves of the intestines escape, by which the puncture of them; and the sewing is more harmful, and once the small wound is worse than the big one, because one should not put the intestines back in, unless they are put back in exactly as they were; for the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, if they are put back in more carefully, and for this reason, the medium-sized wound is worse, because one must suture the intestines to their place as with other II And there are four ways that the rupture of the belly is according to: the two common seams are in the seam of the belly, and the seam of other wounds of the body and II other special seams are common to other wounds; and nevertheless, they are more special with the seam of the belly, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is injured, and it is easy to set, it is done by one of the two methods: either by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the heat.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, heat the intestines in this manner: moisten a sponge or some wool soaked only in cold water, or cook in boiling hot and copper and spike, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed; and never do this with force, and it is better to let it cool slowly.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling departing, if the intestine is moist or dry and badly cooked, because by this the entrance is soon; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision with the instrument with which one copes with worms; and the first care is to still the pain, that we should not cut without great necessity where there is none; and this is the tool for cutting: if you cut inside the belly and outside, and draw out the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out, if you can put it back according to its natural form in its own place, because this is helpful.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part outside the abdomen, it is necessary that you place the injured side on top of the patient's back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the part outside the abdomen, raise the head and the worst part higher than the other parts, and thus manage as I said for large and medium-sized wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	When the wounds are small, place what is appropriate on top of them, then apply ointments that cover the entire wound with their hands, and bring together the lips; this is the common method for stitching, and it is that you press a needle or several, depending on the size of the wound, leaving about an inch from the edge of the wound, and then insert a needle with strong thread; then pierce the two layers of skin with the two layers of flesh, which is outside the skin, until you make it perforated from that part, and bring together the two layers of flesh the four times; then bind the wound with a double thread around the needle on both sides, then evenly sew up the wound, leaving about an inch, and then insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you have done with the needles until the entire wound is closed; and let the needles be of medium size, between thin and thick, because thin needles cover the entire wound, and thick ones cannot enter well: for this reason they should be medium; and do not insert the needles too far on the other side of the skin and flesh, so that they do not cut and open the wound before sewing; then cover the edges of the wound with the needle, so that they do not bleed at night, and put bandages or cloths on the edges of the needle to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn; this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it requires one or two needles for the second stitch, which is common, and it is that you bring together the two layers of skin and the two layers of flesh to a needle with a strong thread; and when you have pierced these edges all four times, then insert the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner of sewing needles; and leave about an inch between each stitch.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestines because it had been 24 hours since they were removed, and the wound was dressed after 15 days, and treated, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle worker thought he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with any ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I applied silk cotton wool twice a day over the wound, and washed it with honey until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two main ways of stitching: take the needle, and the thread from the part in front of the skin; when it has pierced through the curved part correctly, then put the head of the suture or the stitch where you have inserted the needle, and make it pierce from the other side of the part inside the skin; and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the furriers do the pelts, and that you leave one end of the suture on one part, and bring it out on the other, until the stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which Galen properly calls, is such that anyone can do, who assemble the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the main needles to the other main needle, in a similar manner: stick a needle or main needle close to the wounded part, and make it pierce only that part alone, and leave the two wounds of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the front part just above, the two wounds of the syfac; then make it pierce both from the front part just above, in two other needles that are on the other side; and this is the easiest way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galiens say this word, and no one testifies to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, or one in each; and one should put one needle on one side and the other on the other, in the manner of those who embroider corroies; and sutures that when the tear is in the belly, it is sewn more painfully than other stitches of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you probe the fresh wound to its blood, as soon as the doctor has moved it, you put back the intestine and the gut; then put powder in the char, and if the doctor has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes; and stitch the wound, and be careful of the sifac and the mirach; then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you do not have medicines, put on cotton wool, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For in other medical conditions with many different wounds, when the wound is simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not have communication with the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light oil of moderate heat, or rose oil, and put it around the angles, and rub it on the joints; and if it causes pain or inflammation in the belly, and often happens, then you should dress it with black wine, and immediately if the inflammation comes to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and scrape out what is inside, as when it is the large intestines, it is lighter to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is bare, and this is because of the smallness of the veins that are in it, and due to the subtlety of the whole body, and its approach to the nature of the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the tendon jumps from the wound, it should be replaced as the intestine when it is fresh; and if it is old and turned black, then you must tie the limb that has turned black, because there are veins and arteries in it; then cover what is between the ligament, and hang the two threads from the part outside the wound to the other side to equalize the extraction when the tendon breaks, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the breaking of a boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is punctured, and the wound is small, if it can be restored to some people, because I saw that one man was gutted from his stomach by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became an abscess, and in it there was excretion and ventosity; I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to subtilize until it was healed, and the people recovered.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it healing, I doubted that the hairs were not in his intestine; and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, and fed and watered; and some experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such a way: take a sharp needle, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the needle has opened the mouth, put it above the two lips, so that it holds its mouth above; then cover the wound, and hold it so that it cannot slip, then put the other sharp needle in that way before, until the wound is completely closed; and through the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the shoulder blade burns inside, and no harm comes to the hairs, and it can be tied with a thin thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the end of this intestine thread that is very dirty, and then tie it to the end of this thin thread of linen, then wind the thread around the needle, and pull the intestine through, and sew it in the tear; and this method of stitching is no more than according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no skill or remedy, only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula or that it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	that all wound or abscess, when it is covered, is universally called "fistula", and specifically when it is cut and opened up.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the veracity of the nodation removed hard and white, where no pain is felt, and it is cut open like a quill of an eagle; and sometimes it is clear and open, and sometimes thick; sometimes small, and sometimes enough; and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that all wound that is not healed, and there is no pus, except by one of the VIII causes: that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hard pus inside, and on the lips, that does not let new pus grow; or there is too much pus; or the wounds are poisoned, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is like pestilence; or because the property in the region is late digestion, and late healing, and flows by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of fistulas that is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come to large veins, and to arteries, and to nerves, or to the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet; and if they come to the property of the main member, and similar things.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	All fistulas of this kind are a difficult healing, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the bone that I have said, and you have firm knowledge of the cure, and you know how to treat it, if the fistula is straight, take a lead or iron tent, if it is crooked, take a subtle cloth tent, for the plasters adhere well to the tortuosity; and if the fistula has many holes and you cannot heal it well with tents, then suture one of the holes, for the moisture does not pass from one hole to another, and cleanse it; then treat it properly, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and it is close to the joint, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where he feels it; and when you will know truly where it is, and whether it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, treat it according to what I have told you, and remove the corrupt matter and the charred parts that are inside; and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply located at the right place, then cut it open as much as you can, then put moist tents in medicine, and fill them with water as close to the fistula as possible, until the medicine corrodes the remaining matter; and then apply ointments of clean, sound char, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves cause you pain or injury to your main limbs, as we have said; and if the tooth is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the corruption until it is completely removed, then cure the things in the same way as before until they are healed; and if they are not healed, and remain as before, cut off that part which you were sent to do: if it reveals and wants to be removed for as long as you can bear, and remove all the corruption, then restore the tooth; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, then it is too deep, and you cannot reach it; there is no other means than to wait for nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with forceps, and if there are many bones, then take them all, and do not leave any behind; and if the moisture makes it against you, and there is no error or fear, then cope and moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something in the wound that promotes putrefaction, and let it stay around the bones until they are softened; and then they will be more easily broken. And if it is a large bone, such as a leg or thigh, raise the corruption as far as the bone is not entirely ossified, then reopen the wound; and if there is a great part of the corruption, and comes just below the bone; if it is necessary, cover all around the corruption, and then cure it until it is sound. And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matters came to the leg and he was filled with a large abscess, and there was no apparent reason to open it; but the maker by their folly opened it so high that the abscess opened, and they drew out much matter, and became a fistula, and there was much pus coming from the body; and many more sought cure within two years, and there was no healing in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and what was coming out through the fistula was great pus; and the young man's body became red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes, and found that one was coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I therefore withdrew, and cut into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and perforated, and the corruption was coming to the bone from within; I saw that the rotten bone appeared to me, and I thought there was no other corruption except what I had seen; and I began to treat the wound with salves for a long time, but I could not heal it; then I returned, and discovered the bone as before, and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and I saw it, and then I removed it, and I was unable to heal the limb; but I could only cut around a palm of the bone, and treat it all over its length, then I treated it with salves; and it became sound and healed quickly, and it did not require further treatment except for the weakness of the pain, which could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Because for the evacuation of blood, it often occurred, but he was completely healed, and in the place of the bone, a hard char was born, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary at all, neither to the other nor to the coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be done in this way: take a ligature, and stretch it at the head of the bone that opens, and command that it be extended up; and put another thicker band than the first band on top of the first band, and tie it above the char that is on the bone, and extend the head, so that you remove the corrupted char from the outside, and uncover the char above the place where you want to be, so that it does not corrupt the char; and put a tissue or a pad outside the bone to cover the corrupted char; and it should be done so that one can see and feel the corruption, and it should be done again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	If the tooth is decayed and does not open, and the decay is in the middle or in one part, remove the entire tooth; then apply the tison on both sides of the corruption, and sew from one part to the other the corruption, and keep the suture long enough near the corruption as we have said; and if the decay is in the joint, cut away the corrupted part of the joint, and sew the bone or what contains it from the other side; and if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other means but to cover them; and if the decay is on the fingertip or on the tip of the toe, this is a very difficult thing, but nevertheless you should inquire how the corrosion opens; and clean it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve do anything against it; and know that the tools for covering these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and the appearance of their teeth, and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and therefore you should prepare a tool for each kind of work, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the tool that you have in hand according to what it should be.
dou feu	heat
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The members will rot either due to lack of blood or due to lack of air; and when you have treated the corrosion with medicine, and it does not improve, then you must amputate the member up to the joint where the corrosion comes from, so that the pain escapes through the wound, or through the malice, which is greater, due to the lack of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, so that it seems as if they were burned by fire, and afterwards becomes darker, then those corrosions spread from member to member, and take hold throughout the body; if you delay in covering it, and if the corrosion is at the head of the toe, then cover it, and do not give it any space for the poison to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes from the hand, if the cloth is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, if the cloth is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue; and thus do as follows when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes in the first joint, if the cloth after the other joint; and if it comes or pierces, if the cloth all the piercing; and if it goes up the leg, if the cloth at the hip joint; and if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy than to let the hurt member lie down and out, and extend some ministers one of the limbs below, and some other ministers the other limb above, and uncover the cartilage between the two limbs to a span wide, until the bone is exposed; then the cloth or bandage, and put on each part of the linen, so that the hurt member does not touch the clean skin, and comes to the other injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	If blood comes out when you are working, cauterize the limb firmly, or put some powders that stop the bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his eye: he had a black eye that looked like fire burning, and that corrosion first came into his eye, and it took over the whole eye; and when the other saw the corrosion, he covered his eye, and was healed; and later on, the corrosion came from the other side of the hand, and it came to me, and I put some things that reflect after cleaning the body, and could not stop the corrosions; and he thought I would cut off his hand, and I did not want to, because I had hope to reflect the matter; and he also doubted if I cut off his hand, that he would not die, because the power of the man was weak; and he desperately gave up, and returned to his land, and covered his hand, and was healed; and I did not tell anyone else except for what is done in such cases.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Never comes an abscess in a thin limb, and it lasts so long that it causes a great gathering of pus; then it bursts and pierces, and the pus escapes, as if it were a bag; and the skin above is also as delicate as cloth, and does not corrode the bone, nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "sinuses", and are not called "fistulas"; but if it is so long that it reaches the bone from the outside, it is called a "fistula"; and the skin is such that you cut all around it, and immediately when it is delicate, as if it were cloth; and it does not corrode for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	If the skin is burned and the corruption is not yet fully formed, and the skin is charred, then use this ointment: look to see if the breasts are large, and the nipple is foul-smelling, then use the Egyptian ointment made as follows: take aloe, oil, and frankincense equally, and mix them in a vessel over the fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take according to your need, and make it into an eagle and honey, and use it to cleanse the breasts, and hold the nipple; leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by splashing; do this many times until the breasts are cleansed and the pus is drained; if the pain cannot be borne, and the Egyptian ointment and the ash of cinders do not help, then use an ointment of honey and water with a little litargire broken up; or use an ointment of honey and melted wine, where the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine makes the skin soft; when you have done this, and you are sure the breasts are cleansed, then use an ointment of rose oil and wine; if the nipple is small, and the ointment cannot enter, then enlarge it with a needle a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is large enough; if the wound is too large, then leave it alone until the skin or the ointment can enter, and if the nipple that is above is foul-smelling, then cover it with a cloth or lower down where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the wound is in the front, do not allow any char to enter; and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, then apply medicines that will help the wound heal, and place them on a linen cloth that covers the entire wound; then cover the wounded area with a larger cloth on the other side of the first one, according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound to align it, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days; and whoever is on the other side of the wound, often remove it to align the wound, and observe what comes out of the wound, whether it is poison or little or enough, or digested or undigested; and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this way for a while and you see that nature is taking over, then remove the cloth and approach the wound; and then remove the bandage in the morning or the next day, and when you remove the bandage, change the other cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are not digested well after many hours, cut them so that the breasts do not swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons are cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people who take long to heal from wounds, and others who do the opposite; and if the breasts are not digested well after many hours, cut them so that the breasts do not swell; and if the breasts are slow to heal and are distant, use moist substances and dry virtues, such as oil of rose, and vinegar equal in substance; then cook and use it; and this same thing is also good for growing wounds, when there is no oil of roses present, or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and the powder on the honey when it is over the fire; and then apply it to the wound, and never administer an aristocrat long and blue lily roots, which is also like flour and a hundred; and use simple or compound: grind them and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it; and if the cure is long and not cured by this cure, then cut out the corruption, and press into the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the cure of the wound is like what we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises from the pocket of the hand, or foot, or perhaps in other places; and when it is released, and no care is taken, if the abscess comes out, and corrodes and weeps blood so much that it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps corrodes it entirely; and then there are corrosions up to the bone, as long as there is painful putrefaction, and the affected part is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	If you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help much, then you must remove all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are very great help if the bones are healthy and the joint is sound; but if the joint is close to the flesh, and begins to prick and bleed, it is necessary that you put a piece of cloth outside the joint that does not touch the flesh, and bring the blood upwards, and gently and carefully cover this wound with hot and corrosive medicines until all is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cover it and drain, for as much as the bone decays and is, it cannot be healed; and if you see the other decaying, cover it with a cloth as previously mentioned, then cure until it is healed; and if it is fierce, and bleeding, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary that you first stop the bleeding; then cover the joint with a thin layer of herbs in cutting across, and make sure the cut does not reach the flesh outside the joint, for the hairs would feel too much pain; and if there is, put something on top to ease.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the hand must be sharp
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The shoulders that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all charred, and by chance they have a tail or where they have bones, and once they have an angle, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in any of the two.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in none of the two joints do not move, and those who are born at the joint of the shoulder may move; the tail of the charred one is light, like this: cut it off at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint are difficult to cure: if you hold it with a copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the back out, it is necessary that you first cut the round bone around the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable silk for this, then care for it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same things that come together in two ways come from birth or from the wound healing process, or from burning of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it is necessary that you cut the one that is healing, so that it returns to its natural forms; then put between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that it does not heal; or you put between two pieces of thin leather, until the wounds are healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes to either of his two hands with the palm, then apply the cure as it should be done.
des vils	of the fingers
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Veins are large and swollen, filled with excess melancholy, which often come in many members of the body; and more so in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should never administer any purgation of clay, and then give the healthy one from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is done in two ways: one is to apply it, and draw out the black blood; and the other way is to open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The belly is done in this way: first, the first leg of high hot water very strongly, until the big without being subtly removed, then straighten the leg with the bad from above the hip to the part below the groin; then cut the vein in I or II or III, a wide incision, then release and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one to the other, until so much blood can be suffered by the virtue of the bad; and then tie it, and command him to stain himself with meat boiled in black broth; and then repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are flat and no longer bleed.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	1. The fire cauterization should instruct the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the eye is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must torment it to unravel it, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one covers the eye if it is curved, and does not cut through, so that it does not cover the vein; and it is of large size, because if it were fine, it would cover the vein, but if it is large as we have said, this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the vein civilian
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is opened in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in land that has no moisture; and by chance it is opened in other parts than the legs, and this happens from the pus that comes out of the skin, as it comes from within the flesh and muscles, open between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the limb changes, and the wound begins to protrude, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the wound opens, it is necessary to wrap around a piece of cloth of one and a half inches wide and long enough to cover the wound, and the wound, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it is not there, if it is wrapped around the cloth, and the wound; and if it is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the remaining, and do not cover it at its root, until it is all out; for if you cover it, it will go back into the wound, and cause abscess and putrefaction or swelling, and serious disease; therefore it is necessary that it be treated little by little from the top, and nothing remains or remains inside; and this wound never occurs when it is treated with length of hand or ten, and some have come to me, because it issued from ten inches long, and when you cover it, if the pain or pus, and perforate through the bottom, so that everything is out; and let the matter inside be drained, and administer medicines for putrefaction every day, then the cure as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein, and even when it opens into the joint of the little finger, or the big toe, and much blood comes out, and it jumps back; therefore, as we have said before, treat it accordingly.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of verses that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cow disease," because it often occurs in cows, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and is felt all over the body from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it went, and jumps out; and it is caused by the corruption of some humors, such as worms and roundworms and tapeworms and intestinal worms; and its evil is doubtful, because as it goes through the body, and goes up to the head, and comes to the oil, perhaps it enters, and destroys the oil; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see the patient and treat them, it is not possible to do otherwise than when they go: therefore it is necessary to hold the limb above and away from a very tightly bound limb, then cut into it and remove it, and if it comes out in front of the char, and you do not remove it, then cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it corrodes the oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or near the oil, then hold it away from it firmly, then cut into it and remove it; and it is necessary to use the remedy of healing of the bodies of soluble medicines for the bad humors that are thrown out, and if there is a war against foods in order to cure putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "windiness", and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered that one of her arms was swollen; and soon after, I saw a small blister in the vein of the arm; and then, as soon as anything, like quick silver when it cuts through leather, the pain departed from that arm, and went into the shoulder, and then, a little while later, it spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm; then she told me that she had turned around inside her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how the disease moved from one limb to another, for I had never seen this illness in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had heard that it could move from one limb to another, but I had not seen it in this way before; and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, and because that apparent constraint appeared; and it did not appear in this way to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease and the pain feels as we have said, if it appears to you as we have described, then pull the limb back and forth quickly, and then cover it with a cloth until that constraint is released from the limb; and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see it at your eyes, then treat the cause of the veins as we have said, such as fetid pills, and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their likenesses and according to the places where they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and hooked ones, and smeared ones; and those with two angles, and those with tails, and those with pieces; and the one that enters any member as follows: if it enters a principal member, such as the neck, head, heart, lung, kidneys, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it enters any of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appears: then it is necessary that you attempt the extraction of this arrow, for death comes in many ways; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrowhead enters the skull and pierces the bone, and the spasm that is above the brain occurs, which is blindness and dizziness and sweating and trembling of the limbs, and inflammation and trembling of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and possibly without strength in the nose or ears; and possibly with loss of speech and voice; and a white discharge from the wound like pus, and also like dripping blood; and if this sign appears to you, then hold the arrow if it is not already out.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The symptoms of a broken bone when it breaks or cracks are that it is near the right breast, and also feels like it is stuck in something hard, without any movement; and by chance the bone moves like a chicken, and there is black blood, and cold sweat, and syncope: therefore, without doubt, the patient will die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign that the arrow has not been removed is that without any complaint of pus, it jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the limb changes color, and it breathes high and seeks the heat.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead enters the covering of the worst place, it is below the small ribs; and it pours out much blood and great pain and breathlessness; and they move all the member of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead enters the stomach, by chance if it jumps from the wound nothing of the undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead enters the belly, and it does not pierce any part of the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead enters the bladder, and the urine pours out and comes out afterwards, and the pain is very great: it is certain that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and back and spine and hip and knee and legs, and similar members, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of what you were doing otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man with an arrow that hit him in the root of the knee: I tried to remove it, and pulled it out from the other side through the ear fat, and he was cured without any harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And to a patient who had an arrow in the fat of the oil paper outside, and the arrow was placed, and it could not reach further than the tip towards the fust, and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all iron without ears; the wound was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And to a Christian who had an arrow in his throat, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I cut off the barbs, and carefully removed it until I took it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And to a man who had an arrow in his head or stomach, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days without changing his condition; I cut into the wound, and pressed it, and removed it, and no bad accident came to him.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to help a person who has an arrow stuck in them or their back, and the wound was sown up over; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor found harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to help another person who had an arrow stuck in their face, and the wound was sown up over; and it remained thus to suffer great pain; and many similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And if you have an arrow stuck in the face of the king, which is bent downwards towards the left side; and it is leaning slightly to the right part; and the arrow is completely set straight, I was called to cure after it had been bent for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If the wound is very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I applied a thin gauze to it, and I felt nothing; but he felt pricking and pain outside his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the tip of the arrow; I applied a blistering ointment to his forehead, because the swellings did not subside; and the swellings of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the ointment again later, and it immediately relieved the pain, and the swellings lasted a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed the medicine of ague corrosive on the wound with my hands, as long as it was open, and I probed it, and felt the point of the arrow which was lodged in the flesh; then I poured in the medicine of ague through the opening of the wound, until the point of the arrow appeared visibly; and it passed well through the four months, and then it discharged itself when I pulled out the arrows, and one from one side and the other, and could not be removed; therefore I did not cease to subtilize and engineer in various ways of instruments, until I got a good set of arrows, according to what its form would come at the end of this chapter, so that I could extract it and heal the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the miracle worker judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored: I restored it then, and it was sewn up, and the pain was healed completely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	I told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you might place your care above what I do not say, for the books cannot comprehend everything; but the wise masters present and absent know many things, and know what is present and lacking, to find new work, and new tool, in the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not come from members or are discharged in two ways: either by the way they enter, or by another part; and the one that comes out by the way it enters, is an arrow entering into its own flesh, and has never been removed.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her remain until the charcoal is thoroughly rotted and the issue is ready; and likewise if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot escape, let her remain thus for some time, and move her every day; and then she will jump, and if she does not jump, pierce all around until the forest is subtly penetrated, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the head bone, and goes towards one of the belly's ventricles, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned to the patient: if you do not draw it out, but let her remain thus for some time after, because if the arrow comes towards the brain, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not embedded in the bone only, and does not come out immediately, and remains in place for several days without causing harm, then pull it out with an engine.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be pulled out, then administer tar to surround it as I have told you; then treat the limb until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the flesh and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the tent; and if you feel it, then remove it with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot pull it out due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, sinew, or vein, then leave it until the wound becomes large; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears attached to it that hold it in place, then cut the thread that is deeply embedded on both sides of the wound, and then break or crush the ears of the arrow until you can pull it out; but be careful not to break the arrow while removing it.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then pull the limb back to its place, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding from the vein makes it difficult, follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and avoid the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put effort as you are able to draw the arrow without risk, or quickly or slowly, or firmly or violently; and put the hairs according to the form it was when the arrow fell out, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place so that one can see or feel it: cut then above, as much as the hooks can take, and then extract it: if it suddenly fired now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, round your hand and push it into the bone, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if it is of the arrow and is, if it has been pushed in, and you administer slowly, if it is administered with a tool, so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the tool; and then push further, and if the arrow is caught, if it is pushed in, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is embedded, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow is stuck in the chest or abdomen or bladder or side, and it is close, and you can cut through it, then cut above it, but do not cut the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary; and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the needles used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and this is their shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrow's tip is like the beak of a bird, to place at the point of the arrow, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the nails to hold and to fix is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are 31 veins that one can bleed from, of which there are 16 main ones, namely: two veins behind the ears, called the "ear veins"; and the two arteries in the temples; and the two veins in the arm pits, called the "aspirated" veins; and the vein in the forehead; and the vein at the root of the nose; and the two jugular veins; and the two veins in the neck; and the two veins in the lips, which are called the "agelic" veins; and the two veins outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are usually opened are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the right side, and it is called "the main vein of the head" by some people; and the middle one is called "the forearm vein", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and it is called "the vein of the body" by some people; and the basilic is on the left side, and it is called "the stomach vein", and it is above the fossa, and it is the one that is usually opened, which opens manifestly over the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the annular, and it is in the right arm; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is outside the corbeure of the pouch on the right side, and the second one is at the ankle of the left costeit; and the vein that is called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other costei; and in the other leg there are three veins.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	For the veins behind the ears, it helps with ancient enemas and headaches; and the qualities of this treatment, as I have said, and it is that you remove the main pain, and rub the ear or the vein with a rough cloth; then squeeze the veins with a string to a pin, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two holes of the ear: then apply it to your other ear, and where you feel the hair of your other ear, if it is blocked; then take the lancet, and push it out from the ear to the bone, then lift your hand up on the ear, and rub and the skin and the ear well twice through, and make the blood flow until you see; then stop and tie, as long as it is healed; and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The vein puncture in the two temples is best done by an experienced, skilled, and accustomed person, and who knows how to hold the eyes steady so they do not move; and the quality of the puncturer is as I said: that the hairs are strangely stretched out, pulling the veins apart; and it feels like the hair is detached from the skin, then sign of the needle, then lift the skin over the vein at the top of the index finger, and remove the needle from outside, and lift the skin over the vein, and cover it, as you have done in the other veins, and draw out the blood according to your necessity; then release the pain, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then bandage it, and let it be healed; and we have spoken of its puncturing, its covering, and its extraction, which begins this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sainie of the frontal vein is as valuable as the sainie of the cephalic diseases, ancient facial diseases, and migraines; and the quality is such that the pains are strange, twisting their neck until the vein appears; then take the instrument called «fosseur», which has the following form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And put the point above the vein, and hold it firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you see; then release the neck from the pain, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again in one wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	For the flames should not be too hot or sharp, and the iron should be flat, because the bone is close, and by chance it may break the flames when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The second vein that is in the two arms helps with the elbows, and the wrist, and the hand, and the palm, and the face; and the quality of their iron is such that the pain is strange when twisting from any limb, as before; then the iron, and let the iron be flat, a little long with the flame, a little wide, because there is no char.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	If the flame is too fine, perhaps it might break; then correct the blood, as much as you have skill, and then tie it with cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The vein's blood is good against fever, and against swelling, and against diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that comes in the face, and always when it is old; and the quality of the blood is that the pains strain their neck, then strain their neck to your right hand, and take the fine flame long, and make it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well in the nose, and the sinuses begin to heal now; and do not move too much in front, and correct the blood according to your need, then tie it for one night, because it is soon restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The oil of the two junipers helps to narrow the nostrils, and at the beginning of sneezing, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosion, and in herpes, and in lichen; and the quality of the oil is such that the hairs strain their necks on one side and the other, as we have said; and so the masters are above the chief of the hairs, and the hairs sit on one seat, then clean the long one with a little width, then draw the blood temperately, or as much as the matter requires; then do the other part in the other nostril, then remove the lint, and strain the nostrils evenly, that the hairs do not strangle; and leave it just before morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the livers
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the lips above helps to cool in the mouth, and prevents corruption of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and soreness and swelling around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of this health is to make the pain sit in front of you, and hold its neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at both the veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that around them there are small black veins: therefore match both of them, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt, match the largest of each part, and do the same with both the veins that are above and below, for it is one way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are outside the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it is in the tightness of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the healer is that the diseases cease between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look at each side a black vein: healthy therefore both, and do not go too far, for outside are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly healed are healed in two ways: either by pinching at all the flame mertin wide, or by slicing thinly as they cut through, and is called "anesil"; and they are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is as wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has the task of opening closed veins plainly deep with thick blood and turbulent; and this is the form of the flame mirror.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more delicately pointed, and is for cleaning thin veins, where there is thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are outside the neck, and shoulder, and arm, and abdomen; and it is necessary for the cleaner to clean properly, and to remove the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the tendon, and blood flows, then it should be cooled, as I have said; and it should not be pricked with fire, but cut as with a needle.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the priest does not clearly open it, then you should force it and change to another; or you want any blood from it, or you save in its place the vein of the arm: it opens clearly; and he copes with the fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see the joint of the vein, then it is also necessary to force the arm until you feel the pulse; then sign the joint of the elbow, and then bind the arm, and cope the vein with the fire as we have said; and be careful not to strike in the artery when you see the joint swells, for it is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding upwards as high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, then it is from an artery: hurry then, and place your finger on it long, then remove your finger slowly, as many times as it has bled; hold the arm still, and let it not move the bad parts; and be patient, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped, and you feel pain, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery open, for the main part of it will retreat; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	Take a sharp knife, and cut it, and take one of the halves and lay it firmly against the other; if it is not wet, that is good; if not, then the healer, as we have said, applies powders that stop bleeding; and the bandages do not become gray in many positions for the small wound of the sore, and the position of the little arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps to treat blood from the main vein and the body, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it is necessary for the saint to search for the vein that is out, and if it does not appear too quickly, and he finds the vein, and he inflates it and the wound becomes gray, and perhaps it cannot be healed; and this vein opens often, and if it does not open in any men because of its subtlety, then you must use the saint's instrument to open it; and shield the vein from your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The puncture of the cephalic vein helps, as it draws blood from the head and helps with the eyes; and it is best to puncture at the olive oil or mustard flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as it has no nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is best to ask for the lightest vein, and do not cause any harm if it does not work the first time, and start again; and perhaps the veins swell in some people, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about healing is that healing is only done to maintain health and to ward off diseases that may come; and it should be done in one of the three vessels that are in the body: namely, the cephalic, the thoracic, and the abdominal; and if you need to heal at the beginning of the day, do so in the morning, in autumn, and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion is apparent; and if you need to heal on the first or third day, do so after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The sane which is administered to diseases has no determined hour, but rather when necessary is in the morning or at night, in all hours and all times; and it does not matter to sanctify children up to fourteen years, nor a woman carrying except for four months until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	And they should not be sanctified much the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wants to sanctify, in whatever way it is, it is necessary that he cleanses the intestines of a light clyster, if he has much retained feces, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous noxious substances to the principal members; and one should not sanctify much those who are too weak from meats, or who are pregnant, as much as they can be, nor hydropiques; and if one wants to sanctify after colic passion, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent staying up late at night, and all the virtue, or by some arm or body; then subtly the humors, if it is not too thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if one has them; then enter or bath, if nothing prevents, to sanctify more the sane, and sanctify from the vein in the third hour, as we have said; and guard that day of work, and pain, and luxury, and similar things; and be tied and joined, and let the sane be higher than those who are sanctified, and let the rub the arm twice or three times, then gently move the joint above the middle, because when it is too stiff or weak, it cannot correct the vein; and then rub the hand on the forehead until the veins swell, and feel on; then moisten the sane with a little flame of old oil, then put his right hand on top of the vein of the hand uncovered wherever he wants to sanctify, that the vein does not fail to hit.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee as if they were strings at the surgeon's touch, and there are some that are plain of their thinness, such that when one puts them over the flame, they retract from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus are those; and if the surgeon opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, because it is necessary that the surgeon be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, it is good; but if not, then start again a little above that place or below, as long as the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the joint is swollen, and the pain subsides, leave it open for one or two days, and do not bind the arm: perhaps an abscess will form; do not enter the bath, then begin the healing if it suits him; and if the wound is small, or the skin is thin and you doubt that there is as much blood as you saw, then apply heat directly to the wound; and the work should be done gently, as long as the joint is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swelling, do not begin healing again, and put a little oil on it, for it reduces the flow of blood, and is soothing in this wound like the oil; and thus administer the oil in every healing that you apply to the wounds, to stop the flow of blood; and the same applies to triacle and bowels, when put on the wound; and separate the skin gently as it becomes too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there are large abscesses that often occur, even when they are not drained except at this time or when the opening of the vein is small, you must hurry and place a soft, moist sponge on the wound and tie it with a cloth for an hour; and it is necessary to do this after the issue of the blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for any time without turning black or green, you must not remove it; and if you see, place anything of aloes or of myrrh mixed with honey or wine on it, as a remedy.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance of the wound at the base of the church: put your hand on it, and if you press the wound too much with your hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not put anything on it that we have said, for by chance you may cut the artery; but make a dry poultice to harden the wound, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out each wound according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the wound.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it large, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is appropriate for one who is weak and unable, and has the task of extracting arrows, to make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and frequently heal it quickly, and it should be healed by cutting across, not by pinching; and this method of healing is safe from the separation of the arrow and the tearing of the nerve, and it is better than the healing of the long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for one whose body is prone to the wound, it is appropriate to give bread soaked in juice of pomegranates; if they are hot-blooded, take out the arrow three times or four times and then apply the bread soaked in honey syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and strong-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he pounds at the wound after much bleeding, it is necessary that he drink a broth of meat, and an aromatic syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the chapter or section on syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bandage an arm, and wound it again, it is necessary, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bind it little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to bandage an arm after the first wounding, and he has great pain, he should bind it seven hours after the first wounding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to heal from the other side, one must heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For it has much blood within the body which is already heated, and causes fever; therefore one must draw out a great quantity, and widen the vein until it bleeds freely; then one must address all the conditions of healing, and place one's hand on the pulse when it begins to slow, so that the patient does not die in the absence of blood, and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent; and it is never necessary to remove the arm, and draw out blood the second time, and the vein is closed, that one presses strongly against; or if it is swollen, one extends the arm gently, for this would be harmful; but one leaves it until it heals the second time; or one does not go to the tip of the flame, so that the blood frozen in the vein does not flow out, and puts a small piece of linen under pressure.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	If the patient sees it, let it go and do not hold it tight until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessary, draw out the blood from another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is wounded because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of the wounding is that the hairs stick out in sharp hot, until the blood is red; then tie it loosely, so that the vein appears well, then draw out the blood through the cross, not too wide or too long; and let the large holes be stopped, and wound well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, put the hand in sharp hot, and let the blood flow out in sharp hot, until you have enough; and if it is still there, do not put the hand back in sharp hot, because it puts more in than before; and the wounding of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The salve of the savior of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it is done: strain the hand, and boil in hot water until the blood is drawn out, if one sees it; and if the salve goes against it, and if you apply it all over, it will not hurt anything; and do not remove it too quickly, for the nerves are all exposed to the cold, and then put the hand in hot water, if it is not frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the arrow as much as is necessary for you, put oil and silk over the wound to sew quickly, and thus do for each part.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The remedy for the left eye is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you to the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The remedy for the sophen is good for all diseases that are outside the body, such as marsh fevers, retention of urine, and diseases of the joints and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its remedy is that diseases are driven out in a sharp, hot manner, and rubbed on the vein until it breaks, and tied above the joint; and the vein is at the elbow, and through the shoulder many rains go; therefore this remedy is good for a large vein or at the elbow, which moves.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you have the healthy ones above the chest, and you are warned of the nerves that are dislocated, and the healthy one crosses as in painting; and let the flames be like this.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot issue from the chest, reset the chest in high position, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it is necessary to restart the first time, start the second one a little higher, because the veins are salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the other side of the chest equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the elbow is at the elbow bone, and its dislocation relieves the pain of the hip, when it is for an arrow.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its sweat is such that the hairs between or bath, and it is strange above the ankle four in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and crosswise; and it is good to cover it, for the legs are clean, and it is very easily reopened by hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not treat it, then it heals none of those that open or close quickly, and towards the little toe, and warns of the nerves; and correct so much blood as you see, and then release the ligament, and put it on cotton and hold it tight; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction wounds are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and ventosation is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without pricking is done in two ways: either all at once, or gradually; and suction that is done by pricking and drawing blood is done in twelve places on the body, of which one is entirely on the back; and the others are placed under the neck; and the other two on the sides of the neck; and the suction outside the mouth; and the suction on the shoulders; and the suction above the hips; and the suction on the arms; and the suction on the legs; and the suction on the ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the body, and therefore does not weaken anyone, as is done with the treatment of a vein; and it should not be administered, neither at all heat nor without heat, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is drained.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if necessity of diseases requires ventilation, or for customs, then we should remove the bandage every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each ten; for there are some who, when they have the need to ventilate, have heavy breathing; and some who feel repletion and dizziness in their face, and in their head, and in their throat; and some who feel a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swallowed the tongue, and reach for blood; and there are some who snore, and see through bloody and discolored things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the month of May, we command them to fast for three hours after sunrise.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sainfoin helps with the headache of the neck … that comes from them, and it is only necessary after the evacuation of all the body; and this fasting is in place of the sainfoin of the cephalic, and it is not necessary for those who are of cold complexion to use, or who have diarrhea, because this does much harm; and for this reason it is not necessary for the nurse to use, nor for those who have or cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often become disoriented, it becomes necessary to apply the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of disorientation.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The application of the cupping glass on the neck is instead of the cure for the head and the basilica, and therefore it is good for the narrowing of the pis, and to open the channel of the promon, and to all, and to replenish; and it should not be applied too tightly, for if it holds too firmly, it can cause disorientation or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The application of the cupping glass on the two ribs of the neck is good for the pain of the head, and obtunding, and emigrain, and strangulation, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is instead of the cure for the basilica; and it is necessary to command the sinner that he put his hand in applying, that he does not press the artery, and does not cause bleeding from blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Wind disturbances under the chin can lead to diseases of the mouth, and decay of the teeth, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Wind disturbances of the shoulders can lead to diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Wind disturbances of the elbows can lead to blood flow from these large veins, and it is commanded that the patient does not move too much in front, because the insides are naked of clothes, and can be exposed to nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back should be used to remove swellings from the foundation, and for diseases of dislocation, and it should be a large and made of metal, so it can properly pull; and by chance, if it is too thin, it may break; and I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg suction cups heal openly, because they attract blood from all over the body, and are good for old pains of the rain, and the marsh, and the bladder, and relieve the flowers; and they are in the two shins, and the two knees, and everywhere they weaken the body after long use, and bring on fever in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	To apply the leech, first place it empty and quickly fill it with suction, then press it firmly and move it evenly, continuing to do so until you see the liver swollen and red, and the blood appears at the mouth of the wound; then stop, remove the leeches, and take care of the wounds in their condition, for there are those who have tender skin and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and it is necessary to make wide cuts, and a deep one; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to finely cut through the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very painful, you should prick the third time; and when we want to pull out the arrow slowly and slowly, we should only suck once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to remove much blood, we should suck often; and if the pain is not relieved, we should prick in front, and the end should be that the wound is perceived deeply, and it is suitable for those who have thick skin and are hard, and who have strong pores, that you use the points of oil vaporizers and dissolving: if it is in this state, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of pennyroyal, or of lily, or of camomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take equal parts of garlic oil, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person who is to be healed has large and wide pores, one should not put any oil on it, but it should be washed after ventilation with high rosewater, or high cold water, or myrtle water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ash, or high rosewater, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	Those who have excessive superfluities rise from old wine, or vinegar, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and should not be made to sweat before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and should not sleep immediately after the sweating, and it is good that they wait until they should sweat and while they are sweating.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	If those who are sweating are also feverish, and if they are too weak and inflamed; then it is good that they take cold things, such as gooseberries and endives and leeks in milk, and similar things; and they should drink pomegranate juice, and charcoal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold constitution should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine between old and new, and a little vinegar, and small pinches of pepper and pigeons; and on the day they are to vomit, they should drink more than they can hold; and it is necessary to give some men once a truffle or muscat before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main members; and the wine should be subtle, but it is only necessary for those who are very cold to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed on the body to relieve pain are those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the gout, and on the stomach and the abdomen and the legs and the buttocks, for these members do not suffer much from being sucked on their own, and no one does it except to draw blood from member to member, as we put suction cups on the breasts when the newborn is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the stomach and on the abdomen to soften the member; and it removes pain, when there is an opilation or a stone, if by its attractive virtue by chance it removes the opilation, or dislodges the stone from its place; and thus it is done whenever one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity. These suction cups are administered empty for succoring alone; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes with a hot bath of water, as in diseases of the pleura, and in such a way that one fills the suction cup with hot water or water in which he has cooked harmful herbs.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the pneumatic device administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two inches of width and a half palm of length, and has or costing around the middle one small hole, as to put an needle, and be of copper, sulfur before so that it does not burn the hair when placing it on the limb; and has in the middle a crossbeam of copper or iron, for putting a cushion held, and there are big and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; for the pneumatic devices of children are different from adults, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup on the limb: take the wax or linen cloth, and put it inside the suction cup at the cross of the rod that is inside the suction cup, so that the light does not burn the hairs; then put it on the limb, and do as we have said, so that when one wants, if the vapor goes, and remove the suction cup; and take the linen cloth as before, and start again often, if you have the skill.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, at all times, there is no rod or plug, and it is not administered except when it is full of sharpness, and it is placed on the limb alone; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Sansues are not recommended for use in members where it is impossible to place suction due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in similar members, such as eyes or nostrils, and others; and the quality of the user is such that when you remove sansues that are in wet places without pressure, take them; and put them in a wet place, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then clean them with blood and suction, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the sansues; and when they are smooth and ready, if it is a place where suction can be placed, place it, for this is very useful.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the limb gently, then firmly, very well, and then wipe it; and if the wound is too large after the course of the wounds, soak a cloth in cold linen, and put it on, until the wound is stopped; and if the wound multiplies, put on vitriol broken, or gauze, and similar things, until it stops bleeding; or you put half of pounded flesh on the wound, and let it stay on the limb until it dries to the limb, it will stop now; and if you have more trouble, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the snakes do not want to take, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you put a needle until the snake bites it, and then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will fall; and when you see that they are choking, powder with a little aloe and crushed silk, or ash, so they will now die.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Be careful, dear child, that the foolish man does not see this chapter, for no one has ever seen any of the ancient books or letters; and for this reason, the science is hidden in our land, for I have never found a good one; and I know nothing, except from the knowledge of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are necessary, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say or prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced find and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or wounding comes to any part, it is necessary to treat the injury on both sides and on both parts, if nothing happens, such as weakness of the body, children, or elders; or if the tense is not very tight, or too cold; and change cold things, that is to say, cold compresses, and chicken broth and goose fat, and do not drink wine, and do not use any heavy meats, and do not fill oneself too much with food that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of abscess or spreading of matter to the member; then the injury returns to its previous government as it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to apply a moistening poultice of meat that causes large swelling, or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat, and rice, and tests, and piez, and chicken pan, and eggs, and fish, and thick wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the moistening poultice also causes pain and more quickly the breakage.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of the old and the infirm cannot be properly healed or soldered according to their nature due to the decay of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but rather, apply pressure above the broken bone with large strong pieces that support and join the member together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not completely remove the work, and for this reason, it is necessary to apply a moistening poultice of large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And there are various kinds of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the shoulder is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes around, and another in soaking, like the shape of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture in a small cut.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own means, and proper tools in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place; and the fracture of the bone is known by the fact that the bone is twisted, and open well by itself, and it is at the pressure of the hand; and when there is no twisting, and the pains are not great, if there is no fracture; but it can still have twisting, or cut, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It is not necessary that you move it with your hand, but place the following remedies on it, and then gently hold it still.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And if the fracture that was in pieces is now separated into two parts, you must now set them evenly, as soon as the swelling comes; and if the swelling is hot and comes, do not let any time pass until the swelling is calmed; then gently and carefully set the bone, and it should be lighter than the restoration of the other where there are pieces; then hold it still, as soon as it is properly set.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bone is broken into pieces, if it is a hand or foot, or to your hand if it is small members, or to two cords, or to one cord and to your hand; and put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are united, you should gently move them in all ways, and guard that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and properly set the two bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well in your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it is torn beautifully, and do not strain it too much, and do not press it as those who bring it by their work cause inflammation and contraction of the member, as we have experienced many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, well restrain the pain that it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning or otherwise; and keep it securely so that the member feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when it feels no pain, it is not yet in place, and it should be put in the correct position so that it feels no pain; and guard that it is put straightly, so that crookedness does not come when it is restored; and the quality of the member broken is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	The qualities of the member broken are different in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as the arm and leg and similar ones: for those, it is necessary to wrap them with thin linen cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and calf: for those, it is necessary to wrap them with a wide and sturdy cloth, because the wide cloths embrace the whole of the large member, and hold it equally from all parts, so that there is no gap; then wrap lightly around the injury, three or four times according to the length of the limb, and hold your hand a little on each part of the cloth, then go above the fracture and hold it less, than the fracture can be moved a little; then soften the cloth a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another cloth and return around the broken bone; then return to the part away from the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too forcefully, as we have said in the first section above; then place between the cloths linen or cloth strips, until they are all even, then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put something soothing on the abscess and what removes the inflammation, and leave it like that for some time; then strain it with a piece of cloth, or a stick made into clips, or a palm leaf, and they should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the cloth that one puts on the wound should be a little larger and broader than the others; and it should also be as long as it needs for the member of smallness or greatness; then strain it with the cloths as you did in the first layer, then tie it above a thread evenly, as you did in the first layer on the broken part; the tighter it is, the less; and it should be that the threads are neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be of linen; for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of the people who make their bandages from linen threads twisted wrongly, and it is a great error, because the bandage cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should only have between each cloth half a finger's width of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are closed by the tips of the needles after straining in their clean state, then put them out of the cloth or other lint, so that it does not become infected.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the stitches are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And do not strain all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, do not put needles in them until after five or seven days, or more depending on your risk of abscess; and get the method of ancient plasters to restore breakage, dislocation, and twist: and take some flour that is kept in the mill walls, and mix it with a lot of egg, and put this mixture, not too clear or too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the restoring plaster for many positions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not too harsh.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to heal fractures and dislocations and twists: take equal parts of bread, lard, flour, aloe, and arabic gum, and mugwort, 10 grams; wormwood and aloes, 5 grams; alecost, 8 grams. Grind them into a powder and mix with honey; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it is of good composition, and it quickly heals broken bones, and it is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to heal twists: take mugwort and valerian, 10 grams; wormwood and aloes, 8 grams; bolic armenic, 10 grams. Grind them well and mix with honey or a lot of honey, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to treat joints and bones that are dislocated or broken, to relieve the pain, and to heal the wound and the fracture: take a new bandage, moisten it in oil and heat it, and place it on the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These bandages do not cure, but they are good for relieving abscesses and properly treating pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to treat broken bones that cures them: take dried fig leaves and earth partridge leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to treat the fracture of the bone and to alleviate the remaining pain from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wormwood, camomile, flowers of violets, flour of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limbs are chilled, mix with mustard or vinegar, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply more than the first, when an abscess is difficult to restore the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take root of wormwood, linseed, balm, melilot, and sanicle, and flowers of violets and camomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and mix with mustard, sweet salt, or wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates said in his book that one should not put on a broken limb to restore it, except for a mixture of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen said that one should put on a broken limb to restore it, dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to bandage that is good for the wound and pain: take musk and chewable horsehair, or feathers of an owl, and vismalve, and silk equally, and grind them, and make a bandage and put it on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then realign it a little later, and be careful if the hairs do not feel any pain, or if the joint does not move; then do not realign it by force again. And if pain comes to the limb, or pruritus, without rest or inflammation, then hurry, and realign it, and remove the dressing now; and take a light bandage, and wet sponge of sea water, and soak in hot, and lift the limb, until the pruritus ceases, and the pain is appeased; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in hot or rose oil, and tie with a nut, as long as you are sure of no abscess forming; and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and it is healed, then begin to apply the subtle bandage again, and a little dressing, and do not strain it so much as before; subtly until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has spread and turned red and painful and swollen, and you have knowledge of plasters and bandages, if it starts to spread again, as you did first evenly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	If it does not come to the limb as we have said within three days or four or five or seven; and never leave it for twenty days, as long as the breaker is aware, and approaches the adjustment of the char above; then hold it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the limb becomes too dry, there cannot be any nourishment coming to it; then apply hot and cold water, every time you remove it, and this should be done daily, and loosen the bandage a little; by this work, then, the nourishment is brought to the limb, and quickly heals what the foolish people do, which torments the limb: this is bad, and if such works are not done carefully, and only done correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of breaking are, and diverse figures, and the causes are distinguished; for there are breaks that are made by percussion of spear, and the collarbone completely breaks the bone just below it which is outside the bone, as if it were a crack or a fracture; and because of this, this type of break is called «crack».
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear pierces the bone from above, perforating it, and this type of break is called «absolute»; and it is the wound of these two breaks, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact of the shield, or puncture or from the shoulder of the spear, or falling on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a broken bone that approaches the skin that is outside the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound that is set in the bone as subtle as a hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason it is called "capillary" fracture; and if the wound made by being struck by an arrow, or falling, or similar thing, and makes the piece of the bone enter below, and the threads are like those of a hat when they are sewn on the hot irons; then the arrow enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And there are more who have or the main bone moist, such as the child's head; and they have all these ways of fracture that small pieces are dislocated as these; and I will speak to you about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of fractures by the removal above them, and the examination with tent, and the corruption that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known because when one has discovered the bone, and one rubs it above, if there is an open fracture black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fracture, be careful of accidents of evil, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in many positions, if it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	If you do not see any visible injury, and you hope for healing, then begin treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fracture comes first to you, and it is in the leg, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day, so that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spine, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, as long as the flesh around the bone is not rotten, and the injuries that we have mentioned occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes close to the skin that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you remove the part that is torn in such a way: and it is that you hold the head of the painful wound, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound as softly as you can, and if blood comes out when exposing the bone, or an abscess forms, help with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the wound with soft cloths soaked in red oil; and let the wound rest until the abscess is relieved, and make sure that no blood comes out; then begin around the bone to remove, and it is done according to the two methods of work: one method is that you cut narrowly in front, and this is the form.
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And in the second method, have several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be sharp and made of iron in one piece; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the tooth is hard and out of position, it is necessary that you drill around it, as long as you administer cuts with taps, not making it go beyond the bone of the jaw, and should have above the point a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you should have several, so that each one comes in its own place of the bone, so that you have taps for all bones; and this is the form of the three methods of cutting.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for perforating around the broken bone are that you place the tarry substance on top of the bone, and turn your hand away from it until you feel that the bone is pierced; then remove the tarred substance to another part a little later, and so do all around, then cut the space between the bones as thinly as you can, lightly, as we have said, until you remove the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pliers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have perforated and treated the bone, it is advisable to close the openings that remain in the other instruments similar to an incision, but it must be more thin and more subtle than the other incision; and if there remain any small bones, or scales, remove them gently with the instruments; then treat the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is such as the Galiens describe, which is much safer; and it is said to be very effective, and that is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the break is open, so that when you have uncovered that part, you can place the lens-shaped piece of this instrument in its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and it is the part that is in two pieces, so that the cutter is towards the bone; then firmly strike with a small hammer against, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and be careful of the thread that is outside; if it is against the bone, lightly tap the bone, because one taps too much harmfully, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate through the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, it is necessary to remove those roughnesses, and to scrape off the scales with the subtle razor that you should have in various quantities, in order to manage each limb in the most suitable way, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have great razors, and then more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair clippers and subtle fractures, it is necessary to manage them according to their location; and this is a thing that is not replied to by the one who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	If the wound is exposed, it is necessary to apply a cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it with rose oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as lightly as possible, so as not to irritate the wound, then administer by pouring over another liquid, and do not strain it except until the wound is healed; leave it in this way for one or two days, until the abscess has subsided, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lis roots, flour of seeds, powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer medicines without biting; and keep the wound clean, so that you do not leave any bandage, because when the bandage gathers on the brain, it causes the head to rot and become very painful; for when something is placed on the wound that bites, it does not help.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	When no accidents happen to the limb, as we have said, it is uncertain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no other harm comes except from the medicine that has been applied, which has power, then you should apply a part of honey, and three parts of red oil and one cloth, and put it on the wound; then cure it with various methods of treatment until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	That never both bones of the forearm above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and that one is cartilaginous, and does not break easily, unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you bandage your little finger or thumb on the side of the break, and place it inside the hollow of your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the bone regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and guard that the hairs do not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the bone, and cannot be brought to the finger, it is necessary that you place it inside the head of a small, slightly larger nail.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in both parts, make another one, and hasten to restore the first joint, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the swelling of the wound has subsided, then bandage the head of the finger with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you move to another side, where the break is, and the tents are so large that they fill the nostrils.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they said no one should oil the tents every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be oiled with a mixture of honey and powdered charcoal; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never use feathers in place of tents, and if there is a soft cloth around, hold the fracture and blow the pain away; now do what you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you are working, put a piece of wool soaked in red oil or a drop of ichthyol on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If abscesses do not come to the nose, apply a poultice of mustard flour and powdered frankincense, mixed with egg yolk, then place light cloths on it and do not tie the nose tightly; if the broken piece of the nose is small and in many pieces, remove them with suitable instruments, then cut out the wound, and treat the injured parts as appropriate, and sew or cauterize as suitable for the case; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat with tents and apply bandages until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured, and there is no wound elsewhere, and the fracture is not completely broken, but only slightly cracked, so that one can feel it inside, if one knows it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part, you should push your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, push your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inside, and press it against the other hand outside, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is in two, then it is necessary to administer traction of two parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movements of the teeth occur, or breakage, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place them on the broken jawbone, and place it on a double cloth; and place on the cloth a large well-made stick, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it to the mouth so you can, and command the patient not to move, and give light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the alignment changes, then release the patient from the splint, and then reset it to its original position; and apply a poultice with abundant flour or semolina powder, after you have removed the crust; and place a light bandage over the poultice, and if the poultice becomes hard, and the alignment does not change, leave it until it is healed; often healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, follow what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove none of the bone that is broken; but gently remove the broken pieces with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need with fire.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And once you have removed all these pieces, and there is no more delay, if the wound is wide, place some healing plasters on it to prevent infection until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the flint
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The flint is broken several times against, behind the shoulder, and the breakage is in three ways: either it is broken and split into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a breakage with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the break is without a wound, have two assistants, one to feel the broken bone; and the other to stretch the neck towards the affected part; then set the break evenly at your discretion, so that it forms as it should, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a rounded round cloth or linen ball on the misaligned shoulder, and make it as large as your needs; stretch and lift the broken bone, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you set the break evenly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the shoulder blade with your hands, because it comes out in front, then you must push the hairs aside and place a pillow under the shoulder and support the arm on the other side, until the bone of the shoulder blade is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then approach the fracture with your fingers, and if you find broken pieces, it is necessary to cut through them; and carefully remove the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined for any reason, then use one of the instruments you have; but place the tool away from the shoulder blade to guard against infection.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It seems like a spoon, and is not quite straight, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two prongs, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as the gap in the wound that you made when you treated the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, if you cut the wound, and if the gap is small, or you doubt an abscess, then use the wound with cloths and tents, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess comes, if you soak the cloth in rose oil and vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The application of the bone, whether it is painful or not, is that you place the plaster of the flour from the mill and some wheat flour on the bone, and put light dressings on, and place a sphere outside the joint, if you have the skill; then take a very great bandage of a palm's width, then place the doubled cloth and the plaster on it; then take a subtle staff of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage is hanging down; and place the staff on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the collar, and remove the sphere from outside the joint, and remove the sphere from the bad part; and splint each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the staff evenly, and you see clearly that the staff does not move above the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the joint is healed, support it; place the bad part on its back, and put a small piece of cloth outside the joint to lift the dislocation in the shoulder, and keep it there for 20 days; then continue with the plaster, if you see that it has skill, and strain and leave it thus, until it is restored; and it is restored in 28 days, and less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	There is not often that the shoulder breaks or moves out of place, except by direct impact; if the fracture appears according to its figure, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all ways you can; then put powder from the mill with abundant honey on the bone, and light bandages, and put over double linen; then put on a wide and thin splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is not even on any part of the shoulder, use a strip of linen so that the splint is evenly pressed; and then firmly bandage all around, so that the splint does not move from its place, and check every day whether it is healing; and every time it breaks, re-bandage and keep it even if it is out of place, and press the pain on its side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 30 days, And when this number is completed, remove and be careful, for it is not bone that heals quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone is pushed before the wound, and not removed immediately, then make an incision, and remove the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the finger to relieve abscesses.
de la brisure dou pis	of the broken finger
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The fingers are never broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; but they often break at the joints.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the side, and the pain is great, and there is no movement, and everything, and by chance blood flows, and the tendons are exposed in the broken bone, and the smell is bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the hairs are gently placed over their backs, and the bandage is placed between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of both sides to your hands, and subtly put them even in all the ways you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place plasters and dressings on top of the thin layer of salt, or other light material, and wrap it in a bandage, and tie it over the broken bone so that it does not move; and return the limb to its rounded position at the back, and gently hold it in place, and rub it every hour with the oil, and if it moves, hold it; and if it is necessary to remove it for corrosion or for itching that comes to the skin, or pain or abscess, then hurry, remove it, and clean the plaster, and apply what has come from methods of treatment; then reapply the plaster, and hold it in place until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of rib fractures
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The rib fracture does not come forth except in great force after the back, and at the top of the chest, and they only break because they are sharp; and it feels bad during questioning.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the treatment is that you set the fracture as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster, and the bandage of a splint, if you know how to do it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	If the rib fracture is inclined inward, it feels great pain and tenderness, like from pleurisy, because the ribs do not touch the cloth; and it must be splinted, and everything wet with much blood, and this is a severe illness, and the old ones have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And for those who say it is necessary to administer swelling foods that inflate the stomach, in order to bring the broken bone back into place.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this mistake, unless chauffer has come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then the sane.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they said that none of those who put suction cups on the limb, for proper drainage, and this is reasonable; however, doubt arises because the suction cup does not attract the excess from the limb due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they said that none of those who should cover the limb with linen cloth in hot oil, and then put tents between the ribs to equalize the lung inside, then treat the cure of pleurisy, of food and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain is great that they cannot bear it due to the bone that does not pierce the skin, and there is doubt, then one should cut across the broken rib on the side, and one should put a tool to keep the wound open; and then one must saw the bone, and gently pull it out, and then suture the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat them with ointments, until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes out, put moist cloths on top of oiled rose petals, and place them on the wound; and treat it while the wound heals from the abscess, and let it lie down beside or over the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neckbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	There is never a breaker of the neckbones, and only sometimes does it rain; and similarly at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if their hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move or extend them, and when you touch them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	It is often fatal in many positions, and if they move and feel well when they are held and not moved, then the bone joint is saved, and the pains are cured, if it is treated.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if a similar thing comes to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if you notice that the feet are soft, and if the accidents that are in the hands are present, and there is a sensation of ventosities and egestion without volition; and when it is placed on its belly, if there is egestion without volition.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is placed on its back and it wants to sit up, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is dangerous: do not try to cure it.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to it, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the care is that you reward if there is an abscess, put rose oil or chicken fat on the spike, as long as it is soothed; then put on one of the healing plasters and drying, and tie with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where you feel the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dry, it is necessary to cover it with the cure; then remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, to a seam, then treat the wound with char, as long as it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called the «bone of the knee», if you have a bottle of your right hand, and put it evenly on the other hand to your power, then put the plaster and the bandage on top, if you are skilled; then stretch it, and if there is dry bone, do it again, and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ribs of the back
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the ribs of the back are broken, and if it does, it is not often very painful at the neck; and if it is long, and declines to the side, and comes to the shoulder, causing great pain, swelling, and bruising where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the fracture; and cut away any fragments of the broken bone and its shape; and if the fracture is only at the neck, then set it straight until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or it inclines to the inside, then make the patient lie on their back, until the restoration of this fracture is complete.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, then place the plaster on it, then place a splint of wood or cloth, and hold the fractured part so it does not move; and fill the wound with gauze, until it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess forms and it does not burst, then do not touch it until the abscess is relieved, and follow the method we have already mentioned; then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is located between the neck and the top of the shoulder. If it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: one method involves taking a piece of meat with a single sharp edge, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two broken pieces together and lift them up, and cut into the painful area above the seat; then pour the meat over the broken arm, as far as it can reach, and have a small hook in one hand, then lift any heavy object or the assistant extends it down; then place the broken bone in the patient's hands together, until the patient returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to soothe the pain by pressing it against his back, then command the two assistants that one ties what is above the broken bone at his hands, and the other ties below all the limbs, and stretches each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too far, then hold the limb away from the broken bone, above and below the broken bone, and stretch each assistant to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the broken bone is near the shoulder joint, then you should tie the middle part away from the shoulder, and the other towards the back, away from the broken bone; and similarly, if the broken bone is towards the back, then you should lightly tie it, without causing pain, until the broken bone is even with the shoulder and the back, then set the fracture as it should be, and hold it still, if there is no dislocation.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes, do not hold it for more than seven days, and put milk and rose oil on it until the abscess is calmed; then hold it, and the way to hold it is that you put the bandage on the swollen part, then bring the arm up with the support, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and hold it with the support, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is not moving, use splints, and put a wider and stronger splint on the fracture than the others, and have two inches of space between each splint; and each splint should be so large that it passes three fingers on each side; then hold the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter, with more force and less distance.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the splint, and the strapping, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess has healed, leave it to be tied up every three hours, as we have said; then examine each joint, that pruritus does not inflame or come to the limb, or the scarring does not come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the pain, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come, then wait until after three hours or more, and let the pain sleep on its back, and have its hands on its stomach; and put the remedy on the injury with a plain cloth of wool equally, and examine every hour of the day or night, that the appearance of the broken member does not move, or the bandages are not softened; if the pain decreases by the power of medicine, and give it the food we have put before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg dislocations should be reset every 40 days, and then one should apply and administer hot compresses and medicinal ointments for the limb to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the structure is crooked and swollen, it may take 1-2 months to reset.
de la brisure du bras	of the broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, called the "fosciles", where one is small and is the one that forms the wrist; and the other is large, and is the one that is outside, near the little finger; perhaps the large foscile breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When small fractures are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when large fractures are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fracture that is broken alone, then it should be slightly extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large fracture, then it should be stretched more forcefully; and extend it over the cushion, and tie the hand pouch higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the pain cross over itself, and the cushion in front of it higher, so that the pain does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers some arms to the part outside of its hand, or to the other, and other ministers to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the mirror evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each in its place, and if there is none that can be held by hand, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken one there is a wound, I have spoken to the surgeon about it; take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration there is an abscess, then glue the cloth made of rose oil and white wax, which is not too soft or too hard; and bind the cloth subtly, until the abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	Then remove the cast, and apply the plaster of powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, then place the splints, and set the broken bone back in place, a bit wider than the others; and make sure it has six splints or more in various positions: whether the broken bone is in one of the bones, or in two; and hold it above the break, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the cloths that are above the break be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread, from which it is held, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	Reward the limb and the joint after some time.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any accident comes to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until those itches are soothed; and let the limb rest without being tightly bound.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	Then begin the restriction again, and if the joint is broken and the bones decayed, and similar things, then advise.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it rest for some time, until the swelling has gone, and then apply the restriction.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient's harm within twenty years.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if they are asked inside, then one can place their hands on their neck, and keep their neck straight, and avoid movement and stretching, and sleep on their back; and it is said that this broken bone is restored in thirty years or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty years, according to the constitutions and the virtues of the compositions.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	It is said that at the back of the hand and on the palm there are few broken bones, and it does not happen often.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plantar ligament of the hand is broken or torn, it is necessary that the hairs be cut straight and evenly; then place the hand on a flat surface, and extend the bones that are broken, and put them evenly in their place, until they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if there are no abscesses, then put a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be covered in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is on the outer side of the plantar surface of the foot, make a sphere of cloth, and instruct the patient to press it against the broken part of the foot; then wrap it in a long piece of cloth, and put the splint that is as large as the foot of the hand, and apply it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary to place one splint above and another below the hand, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it entirely around the arm, and stanch the joint between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fractured bone comes to one of the two, whether it is the thumb or the other, straighten it as it should be; and strain with the palm, and if you see that you must place a straight small splint to lift the fracture and not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, straighten it and bind with the sound finger that comes after; or you tie them all together, which is best, or you place a splint above, as you would for a thumb; and take care in restoration and arrangement of abscess, and heal what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bones of the ribs are often broken, and one can see when they return in front and behind; and the restoration is as one puts the bone above the breaker, and the other outside.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the hairs grow on their face, then each minister stretches his share equally; and it is when the breakage is placed in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the rib, then one of the bones towards the base of the horn, and the other bones outside the breaker.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the glenoid, and then one of the bones towards the glenoid, and the other extension down; then put the mirror the bone even in both hands, as long as it is according to its natural shape, and then put the plaster, and the bandage, and do not apply if there is no need.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	If there is an abscess that needs to be lanced, let it rest first, then return to your work and care; the process is done in a similar manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap the fractured bone in two or three layers of bandages, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the foot, and tie a long piece of cloth between the thigh and the leg, on either side of the knee, and bring the end of the cloth up; then turn back over the leg and thigh, and tie the broken bone, then place a splint on the bone of the leg; then apply the bandage between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to equalize the pressure, then begin to bind three or four times above the fracture; and as you go higher than the fracture, and less tighten; then examine the two ends of the cloth that you have tied between the leg and thigh, and the three splints above, then return to the top of the cloth, until you reach the knee; and if it does not move from its place, then leave it so, then if there is no abscess or swelling, etc.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it has, if the dislocation, and release what comes, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone that can be felt, it should be removed, if possible; and if not, it is necessary to break the limb, and tear away the flesh; and the cure as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the shoulder broken in such a way that these are placed, as in dislocation and the arm; however, in such a restoration made does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And so that the shoulder is restored at different times, a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the gout
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	In the road of the gout, there is little breakage, but it often rains.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is only a small crack or hole, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and it feels very badly.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one puts together what is broken to its two parts, as much as it can be assembled, then put on the plaster, and if you have the skill, put a round bandage, and hold it as it should be, then warm all the preparations that we have said in other breakages, such as abscess and similar; for each accident that it needs, as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	It is said that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" on the right side, and the other is called "foscile"; and they break in the same way as the arm, and for this reason the restoration is the same as that of the arm evenly, and the work is all there. And if both bones are broken at once, the leg returns to its original shape.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bones are broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen clearly; and it turns out of place.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and make it even, and tie the tendons equally; but if there is a fracture and it is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and lighter; and treat according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two strips of cloth that gird the leg on one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the foot; then wrap them above and below, and tie them in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not bend to the right or left, and it is well; and no one administers the long cloth of the leg, and it is made of cloth, and properly put on the leg to prevent movement, and correctly done, one checks every day the leg to see if there is an abscess or other accident; if the cure is as soon as they are healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot never fracture and are strong, and there is no weakness in any position.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put them in a position where they are on top of each other, like if it wanted to walk, and then place your foot on its own, where the bones are raised, then press them so much that they return to their usual position; then apply the ointment and poultice on top, and put a small tablet of two drachms of chalk powder inside the sole of the foot, then bandage the foot evenly, and other things that you have to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you release the joint, you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	If there are any of the two broken, if you restore them as we have said for the two fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the bone, and slightly wider, then place the bandage as I have said, and strain it gently; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place a splint according to their quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen, and strain the bandage from underneath the bone, so that it presses well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each accident as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the finger bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of childbirth are broken, if the woman is seated, then widen her, then incline her to the part of the back, and hold her from behind; then fill the wound with cotton, and put in as much as possible; then raise the woman, and lift the back slowly and slowly, and at that time the cotton will come out through the natural opening, and the bones will return with it; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do this for seven days or so: then the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of wool, and tie it to the bone with a thread, and blow all the wool into the natural opening; then blow into the thread until the wool is inflated inside: nature will restore the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it in place for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the little finger of the hand is broken, or of the woman, if it is reset as we have said in the bone of the shoulder; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use to it, and pays attention to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means in many cases the right way of restoration: understand this then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the wing, when it is broken, take a goose quill and blow on the wing; then wrap it in cloths, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is large, such as the bones of the ribs or shoulder or similar, that they be cleansed immediately, so that the cleansings that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, and if there is no other remedy, then begin to restore the fractured bone in the same hour, or the next day, unless complications arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if complications arise, then leave the restoration until the next day, until the complications are calmed, and do not touch it on the next day or the day after, for you will bring about bad accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the jaw is broken and appears to be displaced, then it is necessary that you gently place it in your hands, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not equipped with a tool that can be held in your hands, then use an iron instrument that is seven or eight spans long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and it is necessary for the mire to hold three or four, according to how much he has in each treatment of the fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not press too much on the member at your work, and let it be sharp in front, and thick in the middle, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called «palainche», because the patient must have the broken bone placed on top of the head of the visible bone; and the bone is struck once, as much as it regains, and they are evenly aligned against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is thin, and the instruments cannot well take the bone, then you must cut off the head of the bone until the instruments have capability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then you must use a suitable tool, such as an iron or saw, to your power; then scrape off what remains in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the pain is great after, make sure it is not still in its unnatural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If it is in its natural position, then clean the wound with black stiptic wine, and properly if it was in a suppurating state; and do not put anything oily on the wound, such as cerote or other things, so that there is no attraction of pus and corruption; then administer these things when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the entire dressing according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not compressed with the breakage; and many times this has been done by foolish people, and they have brought about pus or death or corrosion in no time; and let the straining be less and more gentle than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	If the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that no evil accident has occurred, as we have said, and you relieve pain at the limb, if it does not require to be put in elevated position; but wrap around it, in place of elevating, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is not healing, remove what you have put on top of it, and apply a healing ointment, such as tetraformacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you move the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be aligned in some manner such that the bow can move lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the bones continue to protrude, and it cannot be healed but remains dislocated bow, then you should cut off the small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you remove all those pieces that cause such pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if the fistula comes to the limb, or some other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open through the limb, like the bones of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not remove it immediately, for many times it dies within 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come from the healing
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the healing of the broken part, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the misaligned shape of the limb; and perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, if it is fresh: if you administer stiffening medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocollis, acacia, and similar things, so that you include none of these things, or all together, and mix them with stiffening wine or with abundant honey or with garlic; and place it on the nail in an enema, and hold it tightly, and do not remove it in the hands; then loosen it, and start another one until the dislocation is removed; or you hold against a piece of smooth leather well made; for the property of the leather is that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the dislocation has become hard like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, if the cover above, and make the excess apparent; or you reset it with any razor until it is removed, and care for it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a weak limb that is after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and it remains after the limbs are weak and thin, there are many causes: because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and could not come to the proper fittings to the limb; or by multitude of swelling; or by too great movements, not in its time; or because it has little blood in its body, it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the pain less, and make the body tense, until the swelling is not multiplied in it; and administer baths, and give joy and rest; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts to the great fitting, and the swelling often of high heat, until the fitting goes to the limb; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	a twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, but it does not affect its natural function: if one does not believe the people who say that one should break the limb completely anew, and many have done this in our land; and this practice is blamed, and great harms come from it, and perhaps the death of the patient; nevertheless, if the dislocations and twists are fresh, it is necessary to apply heated water, or softening herbs that are boiled, such as willow bark, roots, and marshmallow, and similar things; and the mollifying plaster, such as well-made diaquilon, and you take the willow bark powder, and mix it with chicken fat or sunflower oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs that are greasy, and grind them with linseed, and similar medicines that soothe the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the dislocation caused by continuously and repeatedly rubbing with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And every hour, you should reduce movement in the affected limb.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is awake and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with a knife, if it is necessary to cut into the bone, then make a slight and delicate incision; and put on a bandage and treat it.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, then it must now be returned towards the shoulder.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, if the shoulder swells, and perhaps if it is reset to the elbow; for it does not matter that one moves it to where it is swollen: many times spasms and other pains are brought on; therefore, when this happens, first soothe the injury, then leave it, until the abscess is quieted; then raise the limb with hot and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the cure comes in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the shoulder joint from the elbow to the wrist.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There is also the case where the mandibles are dislocated and the dislocations of the mandibles occur in two ways: either they are slightly offset from their place and slightly softened; or they are completely displaced, hanging downwards, and covering the lips so that they cannot hold them, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it often returns to its place in several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if she is whole and complete, it is necessary that you reset her urgently, and do not delay; and in such a way that the healer pours water on the bad place, and puts the tip of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand is outside, to hold even; and command the patient to soften his jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the tip of the hand moves evenly until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to return, immediately if they are both jaws together, then raise the edges of high hot and oil, until it is lightly reset; do not delay the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned evenly, and the jaw with its bad tooth is well clotted to soften, put a cloth soaked in warm oil and wax over it, then lightly bind it with soft bands; let the painful tooth lie on its back, and its jaws should be between two cushions, so that it does not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to chew, but take light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaw is healed; then change what it wants to eat lightly, and do not force it to open its mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper position within an hour, and they are not converted back to their normal alignment, then fevers and sweating become customary, and possibly diarrhea, and possibly vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then it is certain death; and many times those who have had it die within four days.
de la forcelle	of the wrist
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The wrist cannot be dislocated from the side of its own length and below, and it is not reset once displaced, and it is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient bends his back and extends his arms; then press the dislocated joint firmly into your palm, and it will return; then put on the bandage and the binding, and hold it in place; and the patient who is on the side cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is displaced once, then reset it to its proper position, as we have said; then put on the bandage and the binding, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healed; and thus the same method is used to restore the patient who has been dislocated from the shoulder.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	There are three ways in which the shoulder is dislocated: one is that it is dislocated towards the back of the shoulder blade; and the second is towards the little finger side; and sometimes it is dislocated upwards, and this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inwards for the nerves; and often it is dislocated outwards towards the shoulder blade, especially to those who have little flesh, because to them it is very painful; to those who have enough flesh, it is dislocated easily, and it returns easily.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they are struck or crushed, and the shoulder swells up with an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must examine him, until you are sure; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the dislocation is when it is bent towards the shoulder, and it differs between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a difference between them; and you will find at the top of the shoulder a groove, and below the shoulder the top of the shoulder, like as if it were a broken bone; and the evil cannot put its hand to its nose, nor move from any movements; and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, because you can see it clearly below; and this kind of dislocation is only to be reset when it is new, or if the pain is severe.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the dislocated joint upwards, then place their fingers under the joint, and forcefully move the joint back into place; then the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, and put it back in place quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come back into place as we have said earlier, then it is necessary to soak the joint in hot vinegar; and the minister should apply a warm, softening, and soothing poultice made from a decoction of aloe, fenugreek, and melilot in hot water, and apply it to the joint; then the joint should be laid on its back, and a cloth of equal thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the joint, then the foot of the dislocated joint should be placed on top of the cloth, and the minister should gently lift the shoulder and draw the hand away from the joint; other ministers should wet the head of the dislocated joint so that it does not move back; this shoulder is now back in place, and if you see that it has been reset correctly, then you should make sure that the person who is larger than the dislocated joint is standing to the side of the affected shoulder, and pull the shoulder away from the joint, and lift the joint upwards, so that the dislocated joint hangs in the air; and other ministers should draw the hand of the dislocated joint down towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the pain is too light, it cannot be moved with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the resetting can also be done in another way: and it is that one places a long stick in the earth, which the patient should also be held like a spear, and neither too heavy nor too heavy; then it is placed outside the pain, but with a soft cloth over, and the joint should be stretched out along the length of the thick end; then one's hand is placed on the other side firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick of two arms and four fingers wide, which has the top to enter into the mouth from outside the jaw, in this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie above the injured shoulder with soft cloth that does not cause the pain, then remove it from the shoulder of the injury; and extend one arm over the long one, and tie the injury on the long arm, and the other hand at the head of the hand, then put the arm over the wide blade of a knife, and let the hands hang down on the other side: the joint is now healed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is healed in any way, you should put a soft cloth bandage under the shoulder, then apply the poultice with flour from the mill, with incense and a little oil, all over the shoulder and around, then remove the bandage under the shoulder evenly, and return the limb to the poultice, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he change little, until the member is comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then change more after four or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is strong from moisture that has come, or for another reason, it is necessary to administer cautery at three points, as it is placed in front or in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates again after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot be raised above the arm, then cut the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or softened; and cut that the joint has never been fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the little finger and the thumbs, or behind, is made by impulse, and extension of hands, and there is another remedy; and treat until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the member becomes swollen and moves slowly, then use the hairs many times, until that swelling is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	That the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and repeatedly returns; and it is dislocated from all parts, and especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not repositioned, for one can see and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the misaligned shoulder with the healthy one, let the patient see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is torn, and cannot move the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it as soon as possible when the shoulder blade comes, for if the shoulder blade comes, it would be painful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be reset at all, especially when it is in the back; it is better than other dislocations, and causes more great pain, and perhaps it kills the patient.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend your hand to both of your hands; and his arms are spread, and the hands on either side, and bend the joint at its base, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, then it returns when he doubles his hand over his hand, and holds the root of the palm of the hand which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if he does not want to return to the joint, then administer strong extension; and it is that the one who is doing the extension stretches the arm, and holds it with the other one, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when he sees the joint at his hand, if there is any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly, until it returns; and when it is in place, then put a dry plaster with some ointment on top, and hold it firmly, and put the arm against the back of the shoulder, and leave it for some time, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, then release the ligament and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then restart the bandage and the ligament, and leave it like this for some time, until it is firmly set; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels gripping after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or put a piece of fat mutton grease on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him take a bath; and when he urinates, rub the joint immediately, then put the grease back on, and then make him take a bath; and so do this twice or three times, until it is healed; and if you see, then put a piece of moist warm chaff mixed with butter on it, and strain it on; and it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and the return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place immediately after it is dislocated, if the flesh is swollen or there is an abscess nearby.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the return is that you place the hand badly on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and place the palm flat against the appearance of the joint, and press it until it returns completely. Then you should check if it is properly in place; then place the hairs of the hand on a table for extension and return.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the bad side of the hand on the table, and the doctor places their hand over the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, it is well. If not, apply warm compresses to abscesses, and leave as such until you can restart.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it in the joint after some time, the joint will remain twisted; and do not put anything on the bad side until the hand is clean, and cannot be stretched at all: then cut the nerve or artery; otherwise there is no other means than to stretch by cautery over the case, and perhaps nothing else is worth it.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put the plaster that we have mentioned on top of it, then hold and leave for 3 days, then release and leave like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no pain, then apply hot water wool and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Never dislocate the two fingers of the hand at any part, never at the back of the palm or on the inside; then hold the two fingers, and press against the dislocation to the palm as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and push it towards the part where it is disjointed; and leave for 2 days, and then put it back that day; and tie it as we have said, and release it on that day, and make it move, and reattach it to the bone; and do this often, until it is straight, and do the same if it is dislocated on the inside of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	back dislocation of the spine
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the back or neck spine is dislocated, and there are many such cases, there is no cure, for the patient dies from the pain.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excretions suddenly jump out of their own accord, and cannot be held, and often the limbs become soft, or the two thighs or the two arms or one, and often the spine moves to the back; this is called «gilbositez»: the cure is that you reward the gilbositez if it comes from childhood: if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And the one that comes from falling or from percussions or similar things, they said in the old ways of cures by great words, which did not have much benefit; but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of the bone that comes from the front, there is no engine or health; and also the one that comes directly to the second rib, and one cannot cure otherwise than that proper one which comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the hairs should be stretched over its face in the first joint evenly, and he should have some strain away from him, so that he does not bleed; then make the bandage at the head in earth form, and the other at the feet, and tie one lace outside the hairs of the bone, and the other as the waist, and as the thighs, and as the knees; and the assistant should fasten the laces, the one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two bandages; and they should be well tied, the bandage as we have said, and the fingers put their palms over the spine properly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, take a three-legged stool and place it away from the pain, and the hairs should be on the side, and push the head of the stool away from the pain, then put the middle of the stool on the spine; and put the mirrors under the other end of the stool, and press well until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it to the turned one who turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you should tie two ropes to the head of the shoulder of one arm, and on either side of the foot two more, and between each rope, inside and outside, a palm of long hair; and in each rope, a nail, or the turned one corrects, and the ropes are firmly on the ground so that they do not move; and between each two ropes, a rope turning, like the turned ones turn, and in two turns two small ropes of a palm of long hair, to turn the turned one; then tie the ligament that is among the tendons to the turned one towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet to the other turned one, and each minister turns his turned one along the whole ligament, and the masters put the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	When it is even, apply a desiccant dressing with plenty of honey, then soak, and then place the limb on a table three times its length to support the neck and the part of the spine that is not injured, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use subtle pressure until it is healed; and if anything goes wrong at the end of the healing, you must administer medicines that are softening and soothing, with the remedy that we have mentioned before; and never give one piece of plaster, and never give anything that appears in the back of the spine, and be careful not to have any presumption: by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and shoulder do not come out only as dislocations, but rather in four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, and slightly less outside, front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of this dislocation is such that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and more open than the healthy one, and cannot bend its knee at the fire; and it is the legs that are swollen with abscesses, because the patient has fever.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes after this is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who has it in front are that he stands well on his leg according to completion; however, he does not double over with pain in the groin, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot do so before, and retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who has it in the back are that he cannot spread his groin, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the shoulder is out of place at the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The signs of this kind of dislocation are such that if the dislocation is recent, it will remain in place according to its position, and there is no remedy; and it is not appropriate for it to have presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in this case where the dislocation is recent, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must quickly return the joint, stretch it out and extend it behind and in front, and move it to the right and left; perhaps if it returns, and there is no other remedy.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must apply strong force, and stretch the leg firmly at two hands, or at one hand that is tied above the knee; and some other remedies place their hand under the tail in a similar manner so that they push their hands away from their buttocks, then they bind it with a belt around the waist; and some tie the head of the limb; and extend up and down all at once, until the pain is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to treat its likeness. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, it is necessary to put the pain on its sound side, then place the lever under the root of the arm, and the limb which is outside the arm, then extend the lever above the arm, and towards the armpit; then take other ministers his arms, and embrace the large arm of the shoulder pain, and extend it to the other side: if it returns to its limb now; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	If you cannot hold the two bones of the misaligned leg together as we have described, then it is necessary to tie them together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the misaligned leg be stretched out two fingers more than the other; then hang it over the chief of a staff, and let the other arm be hanging down two arms' length from the ground; then command the minister to grasp the neck of the back, and let another minister hang with the misaligned leg, who grasps the back firmly, for the joint is now approaching.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the lower part, then bend the misaligned leg as we have described in the one with gout, and pull the ligament above the misaligned leg properly, and also at the foot; then put two straps, one at the head and the other at the foot, then fold the strap between the backs of the misaligned leg in the correct form; and wrap moist cloths around it, so that it does not become dry, then extend each minister towards him, and the patient put equal to his hand, the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on the flat surface, and press it as we have described in the gibbosity, and cut off the hairs on the affected side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg firmly, as I have said; and place the fingers on the painful angle, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the groin.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the affected leg downwards, nor to raise it upwards, but it should be as it was when the hip was dislocated backwards, as we have described for the couching on the two hips; and it should be on its side, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table; and it will be all right when the affected leg extends its legs, and they are even; then support the knees, and apply the poultice, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and apply the poultice again; and if you see that they are even, then the strap, as before, and leave it for three or four days; then release it, and make the member move well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the shoulder dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: namely, from inside and outside, and behind; but not from the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if he cannot do so, it indicates that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put his foot on yours; then take his shoulder to your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the shoulder firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the shoulder returns to its place, and the sign is that he can bend his leg at the knee lightly; and put the plaster on it, and hold the leg and knee together firmly for three or four hours, then release; and do not work the patient any more until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at fault, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the back, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle.
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The feet are never bruised, and never completely dislocated, and inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the joint is swollen, and tender to the touch at the part where it is dislocated: the pain is slight, and one should gently extend it to the hands when it is bruised only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is completely dislocated from the beginning, you should first put the pain in the correct position, and hold it with the hands, above the ankle; then take the bandage to your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upwards, and beat strongly on the bandage upwards; do this twice, as we have said, bending and taking the bandage; if it returns, it is well; if not, start the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, place the pain on its back above the ground, and firmly press between its thighs, and wrap cloths around it so that it does not bleed from the pain; then hold the hands on the thigh, and other hands extend the bandage to the hands or knee, where they can tie the bandage above the knee; then extend all the hands equally, and the bandages should be held between the thighs of the pain to hold the dislocation when it is extended; then put the hands evenly on the dislocation, and other hands hold the leg clean at the back, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when she goes to the point, put the plaster and press upwards, and the swelling forms, and tie the foot to the leg, and hold the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the joints do not become too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the swelling does not disappear, apply the plaster again; then let it go on the fourth day or the fifth, and defend against the pain for four days; and if it goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, it is necessary that you relieve it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
des dois	For the fire cautery, instruct
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if they need to be extended, it is a simple matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the body or the joint, it is necessary to make the patient sit with the painful part straight up or on a table, and place your hand over what opens these joints, then press firmly, until it returns; and when it is equal and there is no opening, place a cloth under the sole of the foot, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three hours, then release; and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When wounds come with dislocations, and one wants to restore them, often the pain is so great that many die: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, and not wise in the art, and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and slow, and hard-hearted; at the beginning of things, calm the inflammation, and leave the pain in God’s hands, if you do not see hope of health; and when you see hope, now reset the member to its place, as soon as the inflammation has subsided; and when the member is in place, then administer things to calm the inflammation, and cure the wound, as it should be, with frequent dressings; and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are crushed, remove the osseous fragments, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it is better for you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your armor and your body.
Amen	For the fire cautery
