O ye, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine altogether with its fulfillment, and have made an end by its expositions and by its declarations. And it has come to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And for this reason the work of hands is fortified in our region and is estranged from all in every way, so that the science is perished and decayed, and nothing remains of its strength except the small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved. And from this came the error and vanity, and intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or it seems to me that I shall bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as much as is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, is the art of medicine prolonged. And it is necessary that one who engages in it must rise in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and separations of veins, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and bowels and the number of arteries, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of issue.
And for this Hippocrates says that with the name is much, and with the work little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things previously stated, should beware lest he fall into error and harm people; as I have often seen many who meddle in this science and abandon their science and experience.
For I have seen a fool who was treating a boil of scrofula or a woman's neck, and he cut the arteries of the neck; for which reason so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who was treating a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took out with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and it is well if one cut him he would die.
And I saw another mire who took care of one duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the mire full of ignorance forced the fracture onto the wound as stars by a strong tie, and did not leave any xalain on the wound, and left him thus in the end; and he commanded that he should not untie it; and remained so that the leg was all swollen and the feet came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it it was in peace and he did not feel any pain.
But all way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go by the member as long as the members were entirely lost.
And see i. another mire which burst i. abscess and then inflamed by the malice of its lord.
For ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touch it with iron if it is not in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupt.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, work where there is peril in more than one disposition; and I shall show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard against it so that the foolish fool may not speak badly of you.
If you take up your arms in compassion, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and let the formidable diseases of grievous health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have made in yourselves so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galians says in some of his admonitions: “Do not take on any bad disease that you may not be called a foolish fool.”
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicine cauteries, and it is the chapter ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of the making of cauteries, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter ordered and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of help and of the annoyance of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help, and of annoyance, is the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret replies; and of this speak the most wise men, and agree with this; and I suffice myself to their words, for I fear the lengthiness.
I say that cautery helps universally to all complexion where it has matter, except for two complexions: namely hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexion altogether matter, some said nothing and said that cautery is great help there; and the other said the opposite: that cautery does not benefit to illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is so hot, it should not be cured by heat from hot disease, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cauterization does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men. Because when you examine the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it at no time through experiment.
And in all ways, let no one interfere except him who has proven it and who knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the events and space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the masters assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater benefit than a cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and it does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and it harms no other member if it be named.
The hot medicines come from one member to another in moving, and they bring to the member diseases of grief healing; and by adventure kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and of study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I owe you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says when demonstrating; or receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time cauteries should be done, and the times for pricking.
And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms arising are diminished by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains outside and hastening before they cannot wait for the time when greater evil may come to the limb.
And do not ever think like the foolish ones, dear son, as they do; because a disease that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cautery is only a medicine which changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is more useful than medicine for the hastening of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its power.
And a certain thing is that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the disease and its virtue; and superfluities are assembled in him by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered in their place where there are few superfluities and moisture, such as cauteries of teeth for pain, and similar things, and then the pain does not return; but this happens little.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it is so; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauteries are the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth. Therefore it appears well that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the cautery wounds do not cause rot, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they said.
And nevertheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of gold, and if it is too soon cooled; and if it is heated too much; so they do to the fire; and thus there are enough impediments.
And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made appear in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head to the feet, for that reason the way may be easier to find.
Of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two types done because of a sickness called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and even all maladies which come from cold such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar maladies.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head three or four, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can suffer; and then make rear the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the top of his thighs; after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers come, if it bleeds then cauterize with the cautery called "olivare," for this is the form:
And put it on its place marked with ink, and do going down and drawing back your hand poc and poc by turning; then lightly lift your hand slightly, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. so small; and if you don't see it, then begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take i. poc of seil, and put in soft and moist cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it iij. days; after put on a cotun moist in butter; and leave on as long as the burn is gone; after cure the wound of the ointment which is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it is healed.
And they say the ancients, that when more time stays open the wound, more it purges; and for this reason they help to move it.
And they say any of these that one must leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then set back what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other, one must leave the cautery thus, and thrust it so strongly that one lowers the bone as much as one whorl that women put in their spindles for which the humors may come out; and one must leave the wound open long; after this one must cure and soothe.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men who have a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; because the bone is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the bone of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more healed and better for me, and from this use I work in such a way that it is good together.
of the old pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and it lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills that are called «cochie», and of purges of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the cautery that we have said before, and it does not work.
Take heed if the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery a bit that we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the shoulder up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called «vasselz»; and there is one there in which one puts suction cups; and slightly pull your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be thinner than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the shoulder, and this is the shape:
of the cautery of the head When in a part of the head comes sudden pain, and it is extended to the eye, and the head is purged by medicinal infusions, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: therefore I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine sharp and of fire.
The cauteries of sharp medicine is that you take a piece of allium, and remove the husk and cut it 1 part as 2 heads, and then make in the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can put the piece of allium under the skin; and when it will be placed, so tie it and hold it well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and take away the piece of garlic, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on cotton dipped in butter as long as it covers.
After the cure of ointment until it is healed; and if you see this do of some burning medicines that I have written or in the doze treat of burning medicines.
The cautery of iron is made this way. Heat the cautery to what shape:
And it is called "clo" because the head is made in the shape of a clo or it has i. poc of curve, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful place, and hold your hand and stir the fire a little, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and blood runs abundantly.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and place it on the place for iii days; then i put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at all the point, and guard yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned of medicine and of iron do not suit it, then it behooves you to heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and place it so on the painful spot a line of half an inch long, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come to the bone; and guard yourself from the mandible that it moves when one thrusts, and that the nerve does not feel only the movement and that spasm does not come upon the patient, and guard yourself from the flow of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear even to him who does not know it, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the work half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it appears.
And if you see that this cautery does not suit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has .ij. points; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then take this cautery which is called "points," because of which its form is:
After point all around the sick ear, or around the two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a bit above the root of the ear once you have marked the place to burn; and have 10 points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be cured by cautery is not more than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make cautery on resemblances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torture that moves from phlegm of the eyes and expectorations of the head and gargling, and it is not enough, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a pinch of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and place the cautery in the healthy part, and make cautery at the head of the ear above a pinch below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger's width; and leave the cautery so long that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a little finer and it is necessary that the knife be a little larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness, it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; after raising the head of the patient all around, and placing on the back of the head the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if I do so as I have said.
If he is healthy then well; and if he isn't, make three cauteries from the top of the head descending to the neck, and have space between each cautery two fingers; and cure it like the others, and if you see it joining, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and be the cauteries which are called 'olivare', as I have said before.
from the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and what we have said before; after wash the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the sickness is far, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let him stay until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is healthy, and be the cauteries which are called 'olivare' that we have said before.
of the epilepsy
The epileptic should not use fire cautery except for the one who is phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from poor medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then make gargles and mastication modifying the brain often with boiled meats; afterwards the king applies heat to the middle of the head, and there you make 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, then you make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-like according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, then make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When due to melancholy the superfluities or humors are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then you cauterize with those cauteries as we have said to one who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluities decline towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what is said before in the division.
After raising the head of the sick person; after make one poultice of linen well done, as well as one circle, if you put it in the middle of the head; and the patient sits crossed, and be well held on all sides; after present the liniment, and worth warm with mutton fat old; and the heat to fire moderately, so that the two should suffer it; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with other good governance, until he is healthy.
Or if you see to cauterize it, do many pricks over the whole cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain greatly; and then puts on cotton moistened in butter and goose grease.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient a thing purifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
After that he commands him to turn his head back, and he makes cautery on the head of it, and he makes two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of awe is to both eyes together, or one if the descent is in one; and copes all cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off from decrements of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then restrain it as much power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one does cautery or heater under the two bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head's outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: 1 cautery amidst the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or heater under the 2 bones; and if there is need more, so cauterize it carefully above the eyebrow with all 1 small cautery.
Of the course of tears from within the eyes
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit him, then give the patient three nights of drink; after the king the head, and make the cautery or the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two sides, one a little under the cheekbones; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
When the parchment of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery which is called "olivare". Because of this, this is the form:
And if you see so make 2 cauteries on the 2 eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
hair which pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to 2 manners: namely by fire, or by burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your lap; after which upon the paper of their eyes put a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, and let its beginning be near the hairs; then put moist cotton in the white of an egg and muscillage of parsley on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed point by point many times, that the hairs be burned in the place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it rest for three days, then put moist cotton in butter as long as the burn is gone; after cure with ointment until it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery upon that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are defuered, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hair.
The cautery of ardent medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and make it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread upon the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes on the paper; and if the sickness holds in .1. eye only, then must one operate in .1., and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the yolk of an egg; and the head of the patient be in your healthy hand and put your thumb showing upon the medicine, and press .1. pock and the puff all times that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for it feels biting as of fire. When you have done this long enough, then remove the medicine with your thumb. And when the biting is passed, then lift the place of the eye, and reward if you see the paper raised as if it were raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If this is not so, then put back more medicine upon the place where the medicine did not work, until your works are equal, and your eyes set; then put on cotton moistened in butter until the burnt skin is healed, afterwards cure the place of the ointment which is called "diaphanis" and another, until it be whole.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, so begin again the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after curing until it is healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you burn it with a cautery according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your hand; and hold his head between your hands in such a manner that he does not move or lean his head; after, put moistened cotton in the white of an egg or in parsley juice over the eye; after, heat the cautery which is this size: and it is shaped like the feather of a vulture, together as the cautery; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, also as a tent; but nonetheless, this which is shaped is useful for your work.
After press the fistula as it is opened, and remove the corruption from it, and dry it; and if it is closed, work on it, and remove it from the bowel; after, put the hot cautery form over it, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part of the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not make a mistake; and put the cautery into the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, start the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and let it for 3 days; after that, put cotton moistened in butter, and cure with drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put on corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what it would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand for fistula, and open its place; after put in the fissure 1 thread subtle of which this is the form: And it is made to the quantity of 3 of lead; and hold your hand or thread firmly, and do not move the patient in any way, so that the melted lead does not flow to his eye; and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine or oil: the lead so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer turpentine to the nose, and bring the fistula back to the body from the nose according to what is right in its proper place.
of crevices in lips Many times crevices in the lips occur that are called "pimples," and also on the lips of children.
When you cure these crevices with those that we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then cauterize i. small surgical knife cautery according to this form:
And place it carefully in those crevices until it comes to the bottom; after care for its place with cerote until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the mouth, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has putrefied and rotted and is enclosed and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it is necessary that you have one cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you burn or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the burning iron comes to its bottom, and where last; and do thus once or twice, after curing as we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if this one is not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and that is not effective, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after heat the cautery whose form will come here afterwards in such manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot carefully, and hold so long that the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after fill the sick person's mouth with salt water, and keep it for an hour and rinse forcibly.
And in such manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
of the pain of teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the medicines do not help, then there is need of cautery in two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cauterization of butter is such that you take butter of wax and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelope on the point of a tent, and moisten it in melted butter, and put on the aching tooth carefully and hold until it is cooled; and so do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton in butter are cold, and put on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron until the fire comes to the summit of the tooth.
The cauterization with fire is such that you take a rod of iron or steel, and it should be thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, for its form will come later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed on the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cauterization, and then root for it; and this is the form of the cautery:
When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with a heated iron according to the form which comes next; and let it have two openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery to the other; and place the cautery hot upon the abscess once or twice if it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it remain so for three days; and place wet cotton in butter on top until the burn is removed; afterwards cure the wound with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
When the moistures overcome upon the channels of the throat, and even when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by solutive medicines; afterwards make a cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and do not burn more than a point. Afterwards make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let it be the cautery which is called "clavicle" according to the form we have before; and cure the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
of the boil When all and disease of the body are from cold humors, and the patient has no fever nor dryness, and the malady is ancient, if one makes two cauteries on the flank in their veins; and one other cautery between two nipples; and let the cautery which is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make a cautery pricking at all the cautery which is called "poins" because of the form which is before in the malady of the ears; and let the poins be up to 30, or until it encircles. After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be at 3 fingers wide according to this form:
And for these are the cauteries lighter, because you make them three in a copy.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After, support the patient on their back and on their ribs; after, raise the head which is inside with the two fingers of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then sharpen the cautery that has two points as here is the form:
and cauterize the head as much as it pierces to the rib, and should come the figure of the cautery together four cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery that has three points, so the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three points:
And sometimes is adjusted upon this nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After place upon the cautery small pieces of wool with silk; after make rest the patient, and let not be moved the limbs for a long time until it is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated above, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery upon the thick of the collarbone, or many cauteries in pricking.  For the joint is closed and removed moisture and cured the patient.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one must make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you can find, and be dry, and be as thick and as long as your fingers; and the moisten in oil, and the press to the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the throat and the neck, and two small cauteries a little downward in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little; and one cautery under the breast, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as to the two ribs under the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
And said any ancient that no man use cautery of fire resembling one razor, and heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and jumps out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of mice with what we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three, or four, cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the liver cautery that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nubs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the kernel that is in place of the mice, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation with which you lift the kernel be according to the kernel, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After he puts the two pointed irons inflamed until the kernels are pierced on the other side, and then draws out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see it, cauterize with the whole cautery to three nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
of dropsy
Cauterizing is not useful for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes". When you treat it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it behooves you to make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the groin; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the heart.
After leave the cautery open for to put rot long time, and do not leave the care of the sick after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the .ij. intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the claw that we have in front shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is here before put.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and are full of a yellow liquid, it befits that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep into them, so that the yellow liquid will be driven out, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may encase; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine is emptied, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and of strong virtue, then make .i. great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said here before about cauterization of the stomach, at the cauterizing circle; and .iiij. cauteries around the navel subtle to each .i. cautery clavile subtle, and .ij. cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, do cautery on the point, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are on the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit well, do cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all outside the anal cavity slightly above and below by triangulating, and one cautery below the buttocks two fingers' width.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook well, and one sees the face swell, then on the face do one large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and one on the muscle at the whole clavicle cautery; and leave the cauteries open for a long time. After the cure, let the area remain covered until it is healed.
of the flesh that is called "thelul"
When you cut thethelul, if you sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it burning onto that thelhul, and leave it there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein so that the blood does not flow; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelhul, cauterize each as we have said; after the cure of blemishes benefitting as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then comes such a sickness that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes to any one, and is filled and full of pus and corrupt moisture, then you must prove to it a total tent, and keep that you know the whole tent how much she has of breadth. After sharpen the cautery which seems like .i. razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity that the tent is entered, and begin again the cautery as long as that corpse rotten and corrupt be burned, one time, or .ij., or .iij., according to the quantity of some need; and guard not to burn the nerve that are enclosed, and the large veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these parts, and make no cuts but in their flesh, and think that it is not pierced; after cure the place as long as it is healthy, and if the place is sealed, and the matters are removed long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is troubled, and corrupt the bone at the root; and thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the reins, and of great windiness, and does not take a man's talent for women, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the reins on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be .iij. cauteries in a line, and they will do more great help.
of the bladder When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds back urine, then I make a cautery in the part above the bladder, where the hairs begin to prick the groin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as one's thumb; and I make one cautery above the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously stated.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of it, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary to make three cauteries around the groin, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be shaped like a wedge, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found the place of the department viscus, so you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip at one cautery seeming like a circle, and sign before the place around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is inside the circle; and let the cautery be like the one used to cauterize the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make three cauteries of olive wood large, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the others; and care for it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, along with burning medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery is according to many manners, some of which are such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a good depth and width, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped. Sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hip, so that there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the joint are burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, then one makes .ij. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, at the left side a little; and be the cautery cuticular, or be it burned with the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then one cauterizes where he feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called "points".
And this craft is, if one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cautery at the cuticular or circular cautery, and you take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery as to burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not make more pain and contraction for the patient.
And I myself have seen more than a few who made cautery above the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a solution of the belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, of which here is the manner, make one such iron and let it be at the chief as large as a walnut of finger, or a little less, and let it be by links and let it be from one link to the other with a space the quantity of a fist node; and let the links be towards two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be one hand of iron well made; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and feels warm, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and let it be turned upon the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery rent and let it leave for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound stay open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for fear of its regress, and see few who use it; and nevertheless those are good cauteries, who can suffer it, and where it is applied.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread, none of these appearances is worth cautery, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient is emptied of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed with enche, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the clavile cautery mean according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on top of the other spines.
When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pungent cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be near one another. After cure the place as long as it is sound according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery to a place of nerve inflammation which is in a swelling.
of the pain of joints
When the pain of joints comes from moisture that is spread throughout each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mouth of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
And if there is need that you take hold on the face of the foot, then he makes cautery to the whole cautery as one claims "point". And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, and this happens many times, then he makes cautery on each knee three or four cauteries on each side, to all the olive cautery; and if you have need of more, so make more, but do not hold your hand further than while the spear of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and to the back, then he administers the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the bone two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the hips or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good government to the patient and ponder medicines. For if you make good government to him and purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the sciatic nerve
When a rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend towards the hips, and it is newly done, it is necessary that when you see to cure it, he does not move that day; and that he uses things which loosen the belly, so that the intestines descend from its belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the testicles are repaired, and bring them to your thighs, and seize with the cautery of this which is the shape:
as long as it is white and that he feels the testicles. Then bring the testicles to their place; and the minister holds his hand above so that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him i cushion and i bandage on the thighs, and i other on the leg which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start it again once more until you come to the bone; and take care subtly that the testicle does not escape when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and so that by this the patient does not die, or other ills.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and for great people as large according to their measure; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; after that cure other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nurses be long enough so that the testicles do not escape when he wants to go to bed.
And after forty days, when he wants to get up, administer a well-made splint, and wear it for another forty days; and have good rest, that he works little and guards against too much repletion of drink and eating, and of excessive exertion; and when he does this teaching so is he cured entirely. And I will say here after the treatment of the bone in its chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, administer one cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be it at one-third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the place of the fracture and make a line through the width above the break, and another below, and hold your hand over all the cautery clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If it is cured by the first cautery, that is good; if not, repeat another cautery above that one, for it is customary that it must move to the member that is closest, so it is necessary that you make the cauteries as long as the patient is not cured.
of mixture
The mixture are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and even the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile. Since you see them cauterized, take heed if the sickness is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not send or delay, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole sick person, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i.  removing the head to the top, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the nape; and leave so your hand that the cauteries come to the bone, and as long as the crusts come out so that the vapors of the gross humors can issue; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it manifestly hurts, then it behoves you to cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in some of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large one on the hip and .i. another on the thigh, and .ij. on the two shoulders; and .ij. on the ribs, and .ij. on the tendons of the leg, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and take heed of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes one makes cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
And knows that when more it does of cautery, more it does of help, and moves it profits; and knows that the sick person feels not point of pain in the cautery as much as the healthy ones feel it, for because the body is already all corrupt. And it behoves that the cauteries be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to those that you will find in manners of iron. After cure the place with flour of wheat with honey and other cures until it be healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointment until it be healed. And sometimes one does cautery and to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus is removed the swelling; and nonetheless do not intervene any unless he is knowing of the limbs and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of white
When the disease which is called «albaras» is present, and the instruments of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the heat of the heart, until the blanchour is removed, and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of sheep and blood of a dog, of each one part; and mix all together, and bandage it with a cloth, and air it in place until it is healed.
the cure of syphilis by cautery
When a chancre comes at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the circumference of the chancre.  And nonetheless, some sages say that one should make cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen any time; and a more right thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the cautery which is called "circulus", as we have said in many cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot die
When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati," and it is slow to die or because of the superfluity it produces or because of the blood of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after let it be thus. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it perishing at the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with what is of this shape:
And place your hand in the middle of the disease that is called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced the core, and let the cautery be such that the sick person feels it burning outwards in such a way that the course of the rot is alleviated. After cure it until it is perfectly healed.
the cure of fire by iron
Another manner of sickness there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a gangrene of limb, for it gnaws the limbs as if it were the lines dry fire. If you see this sickness in someone who can suffer cauterization together with fire, then heat up the cautery clamps very small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the sickness is; after which cauterize all around until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing of it remains, that everything that is corrupted be removed. And then let him leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized places softened broiled with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of the generation of flesh. And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if this is not so, then begin again the cautery on those who remain corrupted from the places. And this gangrene has been sometimes cured with sharp medicine in place of cauterization by fire; but nevertheless, cauterization by fire is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of sharp medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of spurs that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet by fire birth a disease which is called "clots" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing faulty which bleaches the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are according .ij. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire is that you heat .i. cautery chisel as much as it is a feather of vulture, and be made of good iron at the measure that it can carry the nail from all parts, and that there are subtle edges; after it puts all hot on the nail, and turns your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it so .iij. days until it begins to fester; then I make a poultice of wild mallows ground with honey, and let the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment enjaring flesh as much as it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in such manner: take a cane of iron or of steel, or a feather of vulture, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say porrelz warts; and put the cane so that it can encircle all around, then I put a pot of boiling hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water path deep down to the root; and suffer the patient a bit the sting of hot water an hour; then let him, and it will disengage all to all its roots. Thus make one after another, as long as you uproot all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments which generate flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make to him four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or pez, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; so he will stop trembling, and hasten to the healthy from the cold sickness.
of pus-filled pimples
No times appearing by fire the body bathes, or pus-filled pimples, that come from large corrupted matters. So it is necessary at first when they appear that one make cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that its point be seized by the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or to the lentil-shaped cautery. And no times those are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they may not grow from in forward, but are disrupted the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is cut Many times great hemorrhages of blood occur from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to prolong.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very much until the bleeding is appeased beneath your finger, and no drop issues more; then apply with fire olive cauteries, many small and large ones, as long as they are all red; then grasp one, or a large or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is restrained.
And if it leaps out when you remove your finger from the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then hastily take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And do not cease to do these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the vein departs from the artery, it cannot be well stretched even when the artery is large, unless by one of the .iiij. ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by a strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch veins; and be tied and strained properly.
Who will bring about tightening of the ligature or strictness of bandages or putting things burning upon, or other similar things, if it does not profit, no.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no mire nor medicine present, then he must put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and bind it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the part, but moisten it with cold water frequently that it be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make incisions beforehand as much as he has need of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all sickness in which it is necessary cautery of fire, or burning medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter from the head just to the feet, and I will in this chapter by the same way for those that one finds more easily what one wants.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come to cures. They come from those who have grieved so with their sickness that they die easily because of the ignorance that they find of their sickness, and because of the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give their opinion, and say: «Wait, I am cured»; but the sickness is insidious. It does not befit you that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more consideration in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praised; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and these will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Very dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter for you, dividing it by chapters, according to that which is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head to the feet, so that you may find more easily those that you will need.
The head full of water
Know that this disease comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the head of the child too hard; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone except children, and in all those that I have seen it has hastened death; and for this reason, it seems to me that it is better to leave the work of treatment in such cases.
And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not bear it; and believed so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is like this if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you split in the middle of the head a wide crack; and be also long as two fingers, until the moisture runs out; and see here the form of the spatula:
If the moisture is more thick, and the abscess is larger, then make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the shoulder open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you split in the middle of the head three cuts according to this manner:
And after the incision extract the moisture entirely outwards. After extract the slits of cloth and powders, and put in wine and oil, and leave so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound by tents and by ointments, and leave to be strained the chief bandage, and then feed the patient dry meat of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where the greatness of the abscess opens and the assembly of the water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens and the filling of the water, and make the opening according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flow, so that the patient dies from the decrease of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of a summary
When it happens to someone a malady which is called "catarrh" at the eyes or at the breast, and the disease is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, therefore the last cure so it is the cautery with those one covers the .ij. arteries.
It becomes therefore, when you see them to cover, that the patient makes behind his head; after rubs the place of a rough cloth as long as the arteries appear, then strains the patient his neck with one cloth; then looks where the vein beats, and their places of the one and other are after the ears, and so are returned; then signs the places of  them, then covers the one and the other with a spatula sharp of .ij. parts. as long as the size comes to the bone, and this be by the wide of the head.
And if you see, put the spatula below the artery and cover it above, cutting also as .ij. does in the cross.
And when the vein is cut, blood leaps out continually upwards.
And if the artery does not open at first, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, then take hold and cut up to the bone; and what it is necessary to let blood out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point without any swelling, then cut so that an abscess does not come, then strain the wound and bind it, and take care of the ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, because of the moistures of the tears and the heat in the temples and ancient sores and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit him, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned inside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it strains the neck of the patient with some drapes, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which this is the shape:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pull it upward with tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it back to the tip of the hook, then cut it off from that side according to the quantity of 2 fingers. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out completely at all.
And draw out the blood of 6 ounces, up to 3; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two lengths with a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not come before the joining of the wound, and there comes running of blood; then cut the superfluity which is between the two ties in that same hour, and then, if you want to, you cauterize it with the curette cautery until the bone as long as the bones are cut; and this is the best work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a warm complexion.
For the cautery is aid to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater aid against the moistures. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill the place with old cotton and put on them tents well made; and when they are untied, so be cured with dry medicines that make flesh, and of tents, until it is healed; and if without a cut from the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you use the place of vitriol and restrain it in your hand that the bleeding be stanched; and if you do not have those present, then put on the place your palm until the bleeding is frozen, and rise the place with cold water as long as the bleeding ceases, and be restrained as it is convenient; and what is more mature and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenching of .ij. parts, but the trenching be well spaced to ward off longer their heat. For when the instruments are too tough, it holds less its heat. And it must have between the two knives one must of thick space, and then when you have singed in each of the two sides, and you put the hot iron above until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two lengths; and be distanced between the two shoulders because it is not joined of this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are above the forehead of the head of fire, and it does not benefit treatment of medicine when one makes it, and you see the face of the patient enwrapped, and feels on the forehead ambulation as if of tremors; and where the eye is tenve and moist so that the hair of the papers is fallen, and are dried up the papers, and scorched by the ardor of the tears, then there is need of this cure.
And they called it "bruised cure" in the old days, and do to the patient who has this illness, let his hairs be shaved on his forehead, then make three incisions on his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as two fingers wide all along from the top of the forehead down towards the eyebrows, and the other two as two fingers wide above the cheekbones; and keep your incision away from the arteries that are on the two ribs above the cheekbones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws; and let each wound be the size of three fingers across.
from the incision which is below the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the flesh that is between the two incisions to the entire thickness which is on the bone, then make another part from the middle incision until the other second, and then pull out this spatula.
If it is inserted into the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form: And place the sharp side toward the flesh away from the heart, and the blunt side toward the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to what opens toward the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle fissure until the other end; and then withdraw the blood equally, and express the wound for the blood taken; then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and asafetida, and keep that no abscesses come; and on the third day untie the bandage, and there administer a great plant of water thyme, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures which are used for wounds, until it is healed.
from the root of the eyes
When to any comes acute catarrh, and you see the eyes weeping and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in partakes a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore knows by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh comes from many veins, and the cure that is there, so is this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his brow, then make a great cut between the brow, and another wide one. That begins at the left temple cut to the right temple, and let the incision go up to the bone; and keep your hand from the nerves of the temples which move when you eat; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then sew between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton in it, and lint; then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and keep yourself from a hot abscess; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone until pus begins to arise, then cure it with drying things that make pus dry.
In this way: take two parts of flower of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster from it. And administer it in these wounds to dry pus altogether.
of the stopping of ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing like iron; or seed, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
When it falls into the ear a stone or other manner of thing that does not join with the ear, nor grow in the ear, then put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, distill any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with condiments, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with subtle pincers, of which here is the form:
If it comes out with the pincers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a subtle oncine of small doubleure; and if it does not come out by this, make a chain of iron and put the head of the chain or hole in the ear very far, and plug what is around the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain; then try to bring it out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take gut from which birds are taken, and put in some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the gut on the stone or whatever it may be, and try to bring it out. And if it does not happen of all these things that we have said, then you hasten to split the ear so that an abscess comes out, and spasm; and the manner of the splitting is that you first bleed the patient from the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or their depending place; and let the cutting be like a moon, as long as you come to the bone, then split the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully with your mouth; and care until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer i. spatula gently according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist for the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine tweezers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear when water comes down, it is necessary for the patient to use an external condiment first and fill the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it goes out by itself, that's good. if it does not go out, then take many stones according to the length of your finger thin and light, and warm them a little in the fire; and put them in the patient's ear, one pierced, and lift it up on top of it from its other side, and put another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease to do this with stones until the water goes out completely, and thus if it goes out completely; and if you see, then take .i. reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end grab hold of fire until the thicker end of the reed is burned; then make another piece from other reeds until the water goes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel it, then administer extraction with pliers; and it is the lightest thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if you see any worms, then treat them with fine pliers, and if they do not appear, then take the instrument which has this form:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed in forming all the caine; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, so stuff around the caine with cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, so administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see:
And it should be of silver or of iron, narrow below to i. small holes, and above wider for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation, i. instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take i. razor and envelop around its point conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and that which you see of your medicines in the caine, and let the caine be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be i. pock heated by the fire, so when you distill it in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, because the medicine would not be so good.
Of the plugging of the ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by means of a wound, or by a piece of flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes inside the ear, so that one cannot see them; and sometimes they happen .i. a little bit of pus from the hole, and one can see it well.
That which comes inside and one cannot see it is of grave harm in many dispositions, and in this, you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammation apparent, then the work has totally this spatula from this thing is the shape.
And be gentle and trenchant in front and behind everything plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the inflammation is of flesh growing or a piece of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the suppuration is in the ear, take one sharp and light razor and heat it a little in the fire, then put it in the flesh of the ear. If you feel the suppuration which the patient feels in the ear, pierce gently, and guard that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and sprinkle it with powdered vitriol; and if you see inflammation in the ear, then you should withdraw the tent and introduce another tent moistened with cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop bleeding which are or treated with distillations.
of the paper sheet
This poultice that comes on sheets of paper for the eyes when they are moist and are dry, so it is necessary that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and the root of its roots cut off with a spatula; then put on their place powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorticated, then cauterize with the subtle lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth more; and many times return, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the  gravel
Many times come in papers of the eyes things that seem gravel in its shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hail moves from one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the large opening, then peel each part lightly, then take the pliers, and cut it. If you cannot cut it without piercing a little bit of the paper, then it harms nothing to the patient; and if the fissure is great, so assemble with a stitch, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the eye returns it quickly and generates flesh.
And if the hail is descending inside of the ear towards the top part, then turn the paper upside down, and with pliers take the hail and cut it, and press from one side and the other; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it harms nothing; and when the hail is cut, let the eye flow with saltwater, and cure the place of that which generates flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
Exinach is a fat that is enclosed in the tissues of the eyelids, and this happens more to children than to other people, and grieves their eyes much, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces downward, and sleep on top, and are their tissues under their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance have covered with exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your knee; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach of each part, then put it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with the spatula cutting a slit as wide, and not be any larger than the wound made to the vein; and do the skin around until you come to the exinach; and in more dispositions comes exinach from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract therefore a whole piece of cloth tightly between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and keep that you do not add in the slit, until you come to all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
And if the exit doesn't open at the beginning of the fracture, so carefully make a small incision in the fracture until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in ash and water, and place on top, and bind with bandages.
And if there are such men who grind grain and place on top to corrupt the moisture which is stayed. Then treat it until it is healed. And if an abscess comes hot in its place, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healed.
of the hairs of the papers
When in papers hairs are born adjusted other than nature, and are old, they harm the eyes, and bring forth kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, until this is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery entirely fire, or by medicine sharp according to this that it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and sewing or by caenes, according to this that I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if this not, there is inserted an awl at .i. thread above; and be it beside the margin of the paper or the hairs are born beside these hairs, and draw .i. thread upwards to all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, under the hairs adjusted, at all the spatula cutting, from the great tear to the small; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an arch, like the leaf of myrtle, and anyway it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is devised to all.
And if at there who has need one cuts a great quantity of the paper according to this that the paper is softened; then make at all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear to the small; and be it one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then the strip all; then assemble the .ij. lips at a stitch of an awl at .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air the superfluity of threads on the .ij. eyebrows to any sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, there is no care, then leave the suture and the threads until .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without suture of dry and constricting things, for the paper revives to the union of the wound and the assembly of it, but the suture is moved (as they said the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you draw the paper of a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches wide according to the form which is here:
then cut what goes above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have the power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has one thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put another thread along the large tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin over what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointment;
And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of the chains is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the fence inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. chains by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads from .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on that which mounts above the paper of the eye, and restrain the .ij. chains of the .ij. parties forming; and let it stay like this for some days, and the skin which is restrained will die and become necrotic and will carry itself, until it falls off by itself.
If it tarries, then cut it more forcefully, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sutured, and if the paper is lifted, and the hairs will prick no longer; and this is the form of the .ij. chains that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The work is such that you prick a fine needle, and it puts in one thread of silk thin and fine; then assemble the joints and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order in the chase another thread of fine silk briefly, and tie the heads of the two threads; then put the patient's head on your healthy one; and let it be near the sun so that the work is clarified, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then put the needle into the whole chase at the root of the hair next to the skin, and make it pierce in the paper gently until you pull it out above the natural hair; then pull the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out all over the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will pull the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out from the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will pull the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it closed for two or three days, until the hair is hard in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from the natural ones, and be raised with that one or where you leave it, as long as it is lengthened and then lift it.
Of the rotting of the eye
When this illness which is called "aleacrati" or the rot comes to the eye, there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
And the manner of working on it is that you cut open that suture, and separate the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and tie it as long as it is healing; and it is not fitting that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict. Because if you do those things, the illness returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or altea and linseed are cooked, and diachylon ointment melted in any of the oils, and it envelops a tent, and cure it from that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these works that we have said are only addresses for this illness, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the car which comes in the eye
This sickness which is desoz that truly is called "axacrati," and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you prick an needle, in which it has .i. double thread, and you put it into the car, and you make it pierce from the left tear duct to the right, so that the threads go into .ij. eyes of the car; then being the car above to all the needle, and the top a .i. spatumile wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what is right, it is good; if not, then take one razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make .ij. fissures or cuts inside the paper; and let the eyes of the .ij. fissures be the .ij. angles of the incision that you have cut, and make them angles so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as like the figure of a letter which has no "j griech"; then remove that car, according to the quantity that its cost is aged desoz, from what follows the paper, then adjust the .ij. parts severed, and the seams with a thread of wool; then cure of what we have said of softening medicines, and tents, until it be healed.
And if the malady comes from a split or suture or cautery, then it is necessary that you split a plain split under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the sick person himself, according to what he needs of work and instruments in more dispositions.
of the paper's fold
When this suture occurs to human hands in such a manner that the paper above is glued with the white of the eye, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor underneath the paper, and lift it upwards; and the rest as pinches, until you cut what is exposed to the spatula subtle, which should not be too sharp nor too pointed, so that the sick person can not suffer that the spatula too sharp nor bleaches the eye; and let your incision, with which you scrape this assembly, be slightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it heals all this assembly, and do no time in the salt water of the eye, and the raise of sweet water, and of colere; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on the eye wool moistened in abundance of an egg; and after the third day use dou coliere and the things soudans until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is according to .ii. manners: it is nervous and similar to .i. hard silk, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one cauterizes it with pincers, it cannot be moved; and one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear duct, and crosses little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of the incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle with small pincers, and elevate it upwards; then take a needle, and put .i. hair of horse, or ox, or cow, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce it into the angle, and pierce it all the way through the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and elevate it upwards, and peel all the hair the edge of the angle which follows the wrinkle and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut off the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with every subtle spatula and small forces, and leave the natural char or tear duct so that by the incision does not come the body of tears customarily; and no times is elevated the angle solely with the thread as we have said; then peel it all over the entire spatula, this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a little bit of silk ground, and from the collar made of litharge, and let it remain until the next day; then cure it as it requires until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the awls cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light little sharp according to this form:
And raise the nail up subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the root is pressing forward, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of litharge and red collar and silk ground, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as an abscess, then treat the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it at the edge and cut off a part not entirely, so that no stream of tears comes; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
of the flesh which arises on the iris
The eyes of some men are born sometimes with red flesh, and it covers the iris and holds it back upon the eyelids, turning them outward, and resembling a rose of ballast. And the work is that the patient puts his head in your hands, then you open his eyes, and coil all that flesh with suitable tweezers to these, and hold it by force; then cut off the first flesh, and go on cutting until the end, and take care that you do not injure the eye during the operation; and let the incision be of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the angle, and the small forces from which one removes the sebum, as this chapter later demonstrates.
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then use the oil of silkworm or distill red coral and similar corrosive medicines, and put on the eye cotton with the white of egg, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the wound surface closes, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things soothing a hot abscess; then return to your work as long as it is healed, and thus do until the flesh has been joined in the eye by this semblance.
But nevertheless it is necessary that you align the cure of each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the eye and take away from the sight its work and weaken the eye all days. Therefore, it is important for you to first look at the eye, in what way it is, if it is bad, and there is no other illness besides the red vein; therefore, the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins throughout the whole line according to your wisdom, and let the lines be subtle and double according to this form:
And let two lines be by degrees in one body according to this form:
then coil those veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after hour, until you see remove those veins away from the eye; and guard that you do not pierce the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrode what is remaining of the red vein.
And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, make a poultice on the eye of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is appeased and is assured of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The fistula is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning hot according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it must die, and treat all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and the blackness, if the king has all the instruments of which this is the form; and it is called "sharp chief," and it is made of fire iron to i. chief reont, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medicines.
If the wound is soldered, and flesh is born, and the body of the bone is soldered, and it remains like this for forty days, and it does not renew and is not even festering, and a bad accident does not come from there, know that it is healed; if this is not so, if there is another remedy than to bring the fistula back to the point of the needle according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the shaft be thinned up to the tip as you see here:
Then place it upon the bone near the tear duct, and remove your hand from the eye one finger's breadth, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the eyes, so the matter goes to the cheek; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the eye's opening
When the eyes are open fully throughout and nothing comes out to disturb them or lessen (their condition), then it is necessary for you to tie up the patient; then heal it, then place suction cups or a [pessary] without wounding to suck out, then put upon the eye one liniment made of acacia and aloe and frankincense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it above with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and double each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need for; then strain by means of a firm bandage above, and renew the suction cups to suck out without wounding; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the liniment becomes softened, it is necessary to strain it very much; then remove the liniment after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not; then renew the plastering and the cloths and the liniment and the suction cups until it is healed.
of the displacement of cloth sewn
When disruption comes in the sewn cloth, then it is opened, and there come forth fibers like i grains of resin, and it is expectable to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you thrust a needle in the root of the lower part until that above, then thrust another needle where there is i double thread from the part of the lashing; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the end of the double thread and tie one part of the uve around, and strain it well, then extract the needle and put upon the other eye half in the hollow of an egg; and let it remain until the threads fall with the uve, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and no time the wound is restrained by the uve on each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the eyes then show great appearance, so pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes out from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter then at once; then extract it as long as it is healed.
of the bowel of the eye
This illness which is called “alcunnati” is nothing other than the bowel that is assembled in the eye, resembling a liquid descending, and it is not a liquid; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on one prepared and straight seat, then take the chief between your hands from two parts, and move it as much as you see the bowel coming upward to your eyes; then be so ensfiched, and do not descend and let the light be disordered, and the patient sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend down below, know that it is a liquid, and if the descent of the bowel is not arranged as we have said. So make the patient sit between your hands, then take the spatula subtle and do on the cornea veil one point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, as long as the bowel emerges; and when it is issued, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured with other cure until it is healed.
of the waters of the eye
We have learned the appearances of eyes in division, and what is fitting to examine; thus in work according to health. It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye and hold it tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if their eye is left, or in your right hand if their eye is right; then take in your right hand, if their eye is left, the instrument which is called “almagda,” or in your left hand, if their eye is right; then place the point of the instrument below the crown by the width of a thread in that white part of the eye to the side of the lesser tear, then thrust the instrument which is called “almagda” virtuously, and retract your hand as long as it pierces into the whiteness of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is fitting that the measure of the way almagda is at the parfont of the measure of the space which is from the pimple to the end of the blackening; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal cloth, and then place the instrument up to where the tear is, then express it downwards one way after another. If the tear descends now, if they see the patient before them and the instrument in their eye.
After rest a little, and if the eye ascends the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensconced and it does not mount, extract almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put in the eye a bit of silk gem, and leave from that the oil inside. Then put on the outside of the eye a stopper or a linen cloth moistened with rose oil and a white of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put above as cumin powder with a white of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have eyes too hard, then it is fitting that you prick the instrument which is called “alberit,” for this is its form:
And pierce therefore the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep in it, but make .i. subtle one, then put almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient .i. bed, whereby he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and be deprived of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie him in that same dark house, and try his sight, and let him see some things, and then put him back the tie until the seventh day; and it does not suit you to do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it suits you to align this, for the water rises quickly.
If abscesses come, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and address this which soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be in that same dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and turn back to his things; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almagda by piercing, so that they suck the water, but nevertheless I never saw any in our land, nor did I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almond, for those who do not know them they see them; and be of proper clay.
And let the head of the same subtlety, and the rear in three angles acute.
of the flesh from the veins
At no time are veins born or joined diversely, so there are some who appear like scorpions with a lot of feet; and if there are such where the flesh is cracked of bad color, and if it has flesh that is healthy in color.  In that one then of these veins that is healthy, and not cracked, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and place the wine on those veins, and pull them outwards; then cut what you can sustain with a subtle spatula sharp from one side, until you know that this flesh is completely removed.
And if there remains any thing that one cannot cover, it opens all i.e. the instruments subtle lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without them are sore, or abscesses, wash them as it is proper; and if it is malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize them until the blood is stanched and all the charrs are removed, then giete or neis with water or wine.
And if the opening works, and moisture comes as far as the mouth, know that it is clean; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is char near in the bone above, so that the instruments do not come to cut; therefore, you must put i. a thread of linen a bit thick, and be wove with hands ours, and have between each one's space i. doit or less; and place the patient's head the thread in its nose at its end, and pull it gently until it comes through the nose into the mouth; and many times do this children in schools, and it is an easy thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other being as ours which are or thread. Do this until you know that the thread has corrupted that char, then pull the threads, wipe the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before; do this iij days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of char; and then put on the nose a patch of felt for some days until it is clean, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines in the nose:
And be it of silver or iron, resembling a lamp open, as a basin, and lead it so; and if you see fit, make a closed basin, and let the instruments be full to purge the head; and have i. handle at the top for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the bone about the birth
Many times a disease called "telul" is born at the bone's birth, and it grows and becomes large, so much that it is a terrible thing to look at; and for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning, and push out all the bone, then put on top of it the cautery or the burning medicine; and if you delay in cutting it until it becomes large, it will take hold and become hard, of bad color, of poor sensation; do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, because when you cut it any time, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of bad color, and you see that one can completely cover it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with dry things and restraining ones.
when the bone is cut and sewn
Know that when a solution of continuity comes in one of these worked cartilages, it benefits little, because in no men. Therefore, as soon as this happens to anyone, if he looks at whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then joins the two lips with a suture, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, then you must scrape all the parts of their core until they heal, then join the two lips with a suture, and restrain it, and powder on top of dragon blood powder, and incense ground; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another bonding plaster, and let it stay until it falls by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble it: or by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In men's mouths there happen abscesses hard within, resembling grains of rice, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips and cut above each knot, and take the pincers and cut in each part; then apply the place after incision with crushed vitriol, as long as the blood is extinguished; and then the dressing of oil, and care for the place with dry things until it be healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call “albulus”; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps and cut it at its root, and let the wound or blood go; then put on the place crushed vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which happens many times, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are gathered at the chief of teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sores that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green as long as corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth stink; so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and remove the teeth or sores appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do of the blackness and verdancy, and jaundice and other spots, as long as they are visible; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those no, then it starts again to rere the second day and the third, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments for removal, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper used for removing teeth from outside the teeth has other forms than those used for removing them between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to drain as much as you can, because one must not do otherwise; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse for removing it. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be milked, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth aching. Many times the pain of the patient deceives and believes it is a good tooth, and milk the healthy tooth; and all the same, the pain does not depart from him because of this, as long as the evil remains, for we have already seen this in our relatives; and when you are well certain about the aching tooth, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth to its entirety. Spatula strong to ward off the gums from all parts; then move it to your two tweezers or fine pincers at the first notch and notch, as long as it is well extracted, then firmly confirm the tweezers; and be the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out freely, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, then it is necessary that you fill it with bandages, where the holes are; and if you strain it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break when straining; and it is necessary to work very wisely around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And therefore be well warned that you do not break it, and remain a part, and return to the patient through the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not do as the ignorant healers do who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and bring nothing of what we have recounted; but they bring often through this operation great disease for the roots that remain, or for the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply the place with powdered vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, by which one pulls teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be of well-made iron, and be toothed for better holding.
from the roots of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, then it behooves you to put on top the place cotton moistened in butter i. day or ii., until the place is softened, then put the forceps which are called "algefri," because by this the jaw seems like a bird's beak; and inside they are made also as a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pincers, then it is necessary that you uncover the skin around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali," which is to say a spatula, for this is its form:
And let it be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root comes out with these, it is good; if these do not, then you help yourself with all the instruments, for the forms of which come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two prongs, for this is its form:
and other implements which are before in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like large pliers, whose form is here:
And be this instrument so that it may not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtle find for himself his instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, because there are such diseases where the ancient ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks not the chariot or other bones, or where he can, then seek the instruments that are fitting, which I have told you, and help with gestures, of what this is the form: And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it may hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all of this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the shape is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it is fitting that you know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it or trim it; therefore the rake; and if it is joined with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to a small beak, and be of sharpened iron at the tip:
And the cope little by little in hands days for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then file with a similar tile as is the form.
And it is also like the file with which one makes needles; and when filing the tooth little by little in many days lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then make it smooth at the end to all no razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pricks the tongue, then file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not prick the tongue nor corrupt speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front moves or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that he chew without pain, and you have cured it with restrictive medicines, and this is not worth it; if it must be restrained with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too small nor too large, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are crooked, then take the thread and bring it double between the two sound teeth, then put the thread between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you come cleverly to the sound tooth on the other side; then begin the covering again up to the place where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the ends of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and put it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it tight as long as it can remain, and if it loosens, or the thread breaks, tie it again with another thread; if it remains and serves this way throughout its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two sound teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls, then put it back in its place, fresh in fresh, as we have said; and let no one intervene who is not wise and patient, and sometimes they make the form of a tooth from whalebone, and put it in the place where the defect is, and restrain it as we have said, and it remains and serves this way for a long time.
to cover the tongue's ligament
At no time is this ligature which comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a joined wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament of the large, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or knot, and this is from the joining of a wound, so put the probe and cut the large ligament; and guard that the incision is not too deeply made, for the artery which is below; and when you have done, raise the place with rose water and alum, or cold water, then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and stitch the patient every night, that the places may not join. And if bleeding comes, so put on the place vitriol ground; and if the blood does not cease, so cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other cures until it is healed,
And if you see it of dusky color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, so put the probe, and make it with a subtle spatula, and deliver it from one side and another; and if the blood does not cease to your work, so put on top vitriol ground until it is stained, then return to your work as long as you draw all further; then raise the place with alum and salt, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes there come from within the throat boils called “godath,” and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and of gray color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and its root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the loss of blood; but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will split it, or it would burst by itself; and if it is of white color and its root is thin, have the instrument ready to cover, but first look whether the abscess is hot and has subsided. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his head be on your healthy side, and open the mouth and the preigne the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue down under the whole instrument, for this is the form; and be it silver or steel as fine as a knife:
And you press the tongue onto the whole instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the pincers and put it into the almond, and pull it upwards as much as you can; and do not touch anything of the webs with it, then cut it with the instrument, for this is the form, that seems like a force; and nonetheless the chief are bent, and one place the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut it with tongs, for this is the form:
And be trenchant on one part, and on the other part no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and thus, and if a discharge of blood happens, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates boiled, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is clean; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes arise in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them then just like the two almonds.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was growing inside her throat, that is to say one small abscess; and I had well closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained like this one or two days. And the abscess was so high that it had been put two fingers by the two openings of its birth. So I acted at once, and laid in one one incision, then drew out the pus; and in a great portion of bowel; then I refixed another piece in the other opening of its birth, and I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after I laid the incision in these abscesses, and cut a part, and there came out only a little blood; and thus was opened up the passage of the throat of the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled up the place that I had emptied, until it became very big; so I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat: thus it stopped growing; and I left these parts, and do not know what God did to her after me.
of the grape
When the skin is brought to the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called «perpendicular»; and if it is somewhat thick and round, it is called «eye». When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus of the abscess has calmed, and it is thin, then you must cut it; and the one that is round assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of fusse color or black, then you should escape the incision of it. For there is great peril on the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument of which we have made remembrance before; then put the needle into the eye, and pull it out, and cut it at 1 of 2 instruments that I have said in the incision of the 2 almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the 2 almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of being cut, then it is necessary that you use him with an aid to the cauterization of the senses of fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp and acute. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue to the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confides with live hot coal, so that it is not too thick nor too light; and in employing the end of this instrument, from which this is the form:
And have or chief a hair where one puts the medicine, as the strands of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the eye; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and muscle move from his mouth of the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the back of the tongue; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the eye, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it being burned and the bites of the medicine being calmed; and if you see, take cotton and envelop it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton into the cavity above, until the cotton dries on the eye; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and chiet after 4 days or 5. And if you have need to begin the cautery of the medicine again, begin it again, and after the cautery wipe around the eye, with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, nor the cautery; if it is treated by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysop and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or any of them in one pot, and put them inside, and boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner: And it should be of silver or brass, and let one of the heads be put into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the ulcer by the pipe, as long as the ulcer is mortified; after that it begins again, as long as the ulcer dries, and keep that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a pipe and put inside its head a piece of egg, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; because the piece of egg does not allow the vapor to burden the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether health.
Many times a fish bone or spine or something else gets lodged in the throat; so it behooves you to extract what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behoves you to make the patient vomit as long as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if this will extract the thing dry by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one mouthful of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, it will be lodged, and then you will extract further; and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take one instrument of wood according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that all may not come to it, nor push in the bone inside; and moves worth that the patient puts the instrument, because he should know whether the thing is easy; if he pushes down, or he draws out with all the instrument equally, as long as it is far.
of the bleeding of the throat
Never is the bleeding of the throat medicated, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not help, then look into the throat of the patient to the sun, then that you press the tongue with the instrument that I told you. And if you see the bleeding, then treat it with all i. little pin, or as tweezers subtle that are worth for this. And if those don't work, then take a  haired canine, and put it into the throat of the patient, then push or hair end of the canine i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient remains in water all day. Then take a full i. vessel of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the bleeding feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will be cured without delay. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take i pot where there are burning embers, and let the bottom be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that put the head of the instrument; then place your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes until the nostril; and the nose will now fall, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and therefore it is necessary that it be cured by this treatment.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the nose, is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers so that they can enter into the throat; and has the semblance of a bird's beak, and there is sharpness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot leave; and see here the form:
The chapter on abscesses
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes afterward in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. manners which one is in its own resemblance, and of those that hold moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body. For the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the boil is ripe according to its accomplishment; and if to those that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses which are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it as long as it is rotten within, perchance the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which reason it is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, then pierce it accordingly as long as it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce an abscess ripe without accomplished digestion, except that which is near the foundation, so that it does not pour out further, and be lengthened within, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a great term.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and of the swelling and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where more dependent its place from the abscess, and where it appears to open; and be the perforation along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their places equal where there is no pleurisy.
In these that are swollen, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is good that you leave the perforation as long as it is confirmed in digestion accomplished, as we have said. For if you pierce it before that, it will lengthen the body of the venom from it, and it is full of much dirt; and perhaps harden the lips and the depth of it. And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small openings; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the heart, and cover; when it has become as one cloth, and is deadened, then it is necessary to do as one does with buboes: and if there are some that are cut in three angles, and if there are some that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the armpits; and if there are some where one makes a round tail, and other sizes and seeming cuts.
Those who have no chief, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; then stop the abscess until the next day, then do nothing more directly; do this many times from great to great, until all the pus comes out; also if the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or a small child, or an old man decrepit. Because the spirit trembles at any time with the issue of pus, that by chance it kills the patient, and you do not blame yourself for it. Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, bring in bandages of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, it is necessary that you put in each one a bandage so that it comes one against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shaving of linen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then untie, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if a bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold and clean water, and moisten one cloth, and place it on the bleeding spot many times. And if the bleeding persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book; and if it is during winter, and the place or the abscess is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on bandages and cloths moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on bandages moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as it is necessary, until it is healed.
And this it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
of sores
Of sores
And the incision on a pustule and the moist one, it is lighter because they are of little blood. And if in some of these pustules or chief where there is no moisture, and of these I saw .i. pustules that were in the head of an old woman; and found the pustule as a hard stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had made any in it, one would have done to him as well as a wound as from a stone. In other pustules coming where they come from the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should always be to the most dependent place, so that the bowe can pass out; and the cure as it is appropriate.
of the scrofulas
Many times these pustules occur in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come from other parts or bodies, and are many, and are joined with one another. And each scrofulous is properly in its own place, as the others and the pustule of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrophules are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones who do not want to obey health. In those therefore that you see of good disposition when touched, and is similar in color to the body, and quiet from each part and is not at all close to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the vein, and is not too deep; it befits that you cut it above, and make a skin flap on each side, and bring the two lips of the wound as one, if you need it, as we have said in pustules of the head; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let the spatula not be too big nor trenchant, that the hand does not slip, and do not see too far forward, that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and constrict the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then with your index finger feel if there remain any small pustules, if so cut them and clean them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the pustule, it does not behoove you to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut the whole pustule, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then when there is no remainder of superfluity because of the size of the pustule. It is necessary that you understand to cut the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said. Those pustules that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears more; and pierce it thus as the one before mentioned, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, cure it with ointment inducing flesh, until it is healed.
of a squint (or strabismus)
The ancients said and spoke of cutting the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and do not help them with this, because all veins and arteries of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds. When the illness is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below three circles or four, a small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the sifac, not in the cartilage.
and those are similar to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from them.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the neck, then split the keel as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm from the neck that comes out from the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour is past from which one doubts strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them entirely together along the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healthy.
Albucasim says that one should not do this juice until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the lack of breath. Therefore, cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
And for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in 3 days or in 4. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and care for it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took i. knife, and stabbed it in her throat, and cut part of the veins of the stomach;
and I was called by her to cure her, and I found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and well that it had not been cut vein nor led other than the throat, and the wind was passing through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
and it did not happen to the young woman other than that she became hoarse of voice, and returned after to her disposition;
for this reason I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called a "throat hernia," and is a large abscess in the color of a vein, and it is very common in women;
and it occurs in two ways: naturally and accidentally; the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to fat deposits in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and he has fear, and it does not befit to work of doing hard except in this that is small, and the proves and seeks throughout the intruder. If you find it also like our fat, and cannot to any vein, if the chops, as one chops the ours, and the trains to all its top, if there is any of it. and encircles well soon, and the cures as it befits, until it is perfectly healthy.
of ours
Many ways there are to us, which I will say all the appearances.
And or it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between our and issue.
I say that issue is sometimes and fever holding, as long as the boiling is not passed, and is accomplished the rotting; therefore rests the fever and the heat.
With the our there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains one abscess, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins as well as a boil, and becomes large.
and are according to two appearances, or coarse, or moist, and very much of color as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the new, that you first inquire and examine with all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to its form which comes or chapter which is afterwards.
And the manner of the inquisition of the abscesses of the new is that you prick or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, as long as you know that the instrument has pierced the heart, then it is according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the "entromissoire", and take care in those that jump out.
If moisture runs short, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
and if after the introduction moisture comes, know that it is greasy, so treat it in a cross and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape it on each side and ward the coat where it lies so you draw it out healthy with the new;
and if you cannot draw it out healthy, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
and if it remains for a while, and the patient does not feel pain, apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and restrain the wound, and put upon it soothing things as an ointment warm, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed
and if the wound is large, sew the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those who cause flesh to grow.
and if the vein bleeding is contrary or otherwise hastens, apply the place of powdered vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cover what remains in the new
See here the forms of the instruments for introducing [things], and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares called "albaret," and one that is called "breb", and there are also three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses of fistulas;
and are also like needles with which one sews sorcerers' robes, and are of citrine brass, or iron, or silver, and the most valuable are those that are yellow, and are more proven of black lead to surround the curves of fistula.
and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of the probes are of many appearances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and so also are probes that have two curves in three ways too;
and so also are probes that have three curves, and are also in three ways; and so also are probes that have two curves, and probes of a single curve only, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these things that one does is to cut, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which one scrapes the veins with, for one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
And of these instruments are the probes put in handles, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
And they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
And one should not use them anywhere but in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and armpits, and similar places.
And sometimes one makes i.e. another small instrument, resembling the scrolls of fists, according to this form, with which one drains blood:
And one puts it sometimes in the place that is healthy to cut veins and arteries, and sometimes one returns according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem like breasts of a woman;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, it is necessary to be according to this form of this line b. up to .g.: then scrape the fat, and smear the wound with medicine that closes flesh, then assemble the two lips of the wound together, and tend to it until it is healed
and if the mother's breast is lowered and softened for its size as it happens to women, then make two incisions in two corresponding ribs; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to the line g; then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said about sutures and powders, and whatever is necessary in the care, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, for that the patient does not want to rest, or for the flow of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. and leave it until it absorbs the remaining and the grease, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous lumps or boils, and there are some that contain moisture.
Those therefore who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b. up to line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound to old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with oil before this as long as it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the semblance of a scrofulous sore, then treat it as we have said about cutting into scrofulous sores, and if the wound runs with pus, then apply cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is cut and the skin above it is seared, many times abscesses come, and it also happens to the vein inflamed and an abscess.
And if the one who knows knows this about the artery, then the abscess is long formed by it; And when you feel it at your toes, that is to say, restraint; and when it is about the vein, it is red fever appearing;
And it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and elbows and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in the one who is inflamed by artery making from above the skin of the long;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and he who is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in the one who is inflamed by artery making from above the skin of the long; then work the size of the incisions, and beautifully depart the artery from the webs, until it is uncovered;
then put under it a needle, and make it pierce to the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in two leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then point the place which is between the two ties with an introducer until the blood that is there issues, and let it be opened the abscess;
then administer the cure that engenders a bow, as long as the linen adheres. Then cure those who are anointed with this, until they are healed;
and if the abscess is near the size of the vein, then it behooves you to grasp with your hand that which you can of the abscess throughout the skin. Then put the needle beneath where you are grasping, and pierce it, and let there be three threads, double each one, so that you draw it from the other side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or bind one of the two parts with two threads of yarn
and if you doubt that the thread is not far enough, put another needle through all the threads under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four lengths;
then cut the abscess as long as the superfluities issue from it, then cut away the superfluity of the core and leave what is tied;
then put on one draping moistened in wine and oil, then administer cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Also as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured, or by too much labor, and similar things.
And these happen more often as shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and this is the most grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of the flesh, and it's in many dispositions without pain;
And when one presses upon it firmly, the patient feels pain, and it's not at all part of the flesh, but below the heart.
And move well in all directions, and do not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and the one who is at the joints should not be covered with iron: for fear it would go into contraction.
And he who is on the head or on the forehead, makes the skin to the spatula. If the abscess is small, so hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, so suspend it to the incision, and the skin, then the bone, and assemble the wound with stitches, and dress it until it is healed.
of large mouths hanging At no time occurs in bellies and nowhere else, it is a disease that is called “fungus” because of the resemblance of ears, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and very large;
And I saw one man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a fine root, and they were slightly split, and pus came out of them.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artichoke is white and moist and has a fine root;
If the cut is made at the spatula wide, and there are in your presence the fire cautery. For when cutting comes many times too great runnings of blood, and if he without you it will not, then hasten therefore to cauterize.
And if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision of iron, take one thread of flax well made, and tie the articulation as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of flax until it cuts the articulation, and choose by him without work; and if the roots are large, be fearful to cut even for the belly, but you may well cut half,
Then cauterize so that it does not return; then heal the wound, and guard that you do not cover the tissue which is of a sickly color and weak feeling and milky appearance.
For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I shall come to the cure of ulcers after this.
When the boil has matured
If the appearance of the boil comes from cautery of a wound or a cut on the skin, and it is on the belly and has some of the boils as they appear in other areas, or of blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what is mentioned before, or from wind;
and if it is through the rupture of the skin and the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess appears similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is through the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed with its two sides, it returns, and then returns again, and perhaps it is narrowed, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without constraining it at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity;
and if it is because of windiness, then feel the touch, and the work is that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or the vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you let the treatment continue. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you command the patient to keep his arm raised, and be extended straight, then seize it all around the belly; then command him to move slightly between your hands, Then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula. Then extend half of the abscess upward to the whole large incision.
Then work the half of the abscess extended onto the thread, and put your index finger into it, and seek the intestine. If you find it caught in the ligament, untie it, and bring the intestine out to the outside of the belly;
and if you find it bulged, take it with the forceps, and cut away the excess;
and if the artery or vein opposes you, then go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two thread through them, and put the two needles back where you made a cross so that what you did is visible.
Then stretch the abscess outwards in four lengths on the needles, and if you see it is ready, remove the needles, and leave the place until it dries out, letting the dead tissue fall away by itself. or you cut it when it is subtle and ripe, then the care of this that it behoves, and cover the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is subtle and ripe, then the care of this that it behoves, and cover the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or the moisture that you find, then care for the place as it behoves, and weld the place.
of the ulcer
We have said in the division the appearances of ulcers, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that an ulcer is introduced into the marrow, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer which is in the armpits, and in the groin, and similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not behoove you to approach it, for I have never cured any of them; nor has anyone ever cured any before me.
And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge once the patient of black coal; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then make the patient i. good place to do the work; then throw your incisions or ulcer, and the head from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood flow completely, and squeeze well the place with your hand or with any thing, and if the flow of blood makes you contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the blood is extinguished; then cure him with another cure until he is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the likenesses of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each likeness, and the cure which is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: so it is illuminated only; and one should not touch iron in these two likenesses: namely, tympanites and hydrops. Because it is a mortal thing; therefore, when you medicate this semblance of dropsy which is called "illuminated" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, consider whether the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and solution of the belly and similar things; if so, do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must work thus: Lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the hip, then take the spinal spatula according to this form: And let it be trenchant in two parts. at the point, and all the way do not be so deep that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and do not be able to pierce it;
then look if the dropsy is in danger toward the intestines: then it is necessary that you split above the belly three fingers straight below the ribs; and if the dropsy is because of the disease of the liver, let the cut be on the left side of the belly three fingers; and if it is because of the mucus, let it be on the right, and do not allow the patient to lie on the split that the superfluities do not run toward the weak place;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the gut, and lift your hand to the spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as when scraping at the quantity of a fingernail or in which it enters; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the spot where it is eight, and this is the place of the water, then the trail out, and put this instrument from this is the form: And is similar to a silver chain subtle, and is of iron or archut light, and has in the lower part one small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather:
To the head above is the ailment, so that when the instruments come to the point, they descend now upon the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than it is due in that hour, perchance the patient dies by the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls faint, or approaches death.
But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the point, and it is held now by the heart which stops the passage which is on the syfac, for that I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the patient suffering such, and treat of the point a small quantity.
Do this none day, and keep yourself from following until there remains but a bit of point. And if you doubt on the patient, and you let much blood out, then cure with burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and it stays dry; and cure with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the point, as I have said before.
of the stoppage of the penis At no time are children born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. If this is the case, immediately it must be examined with a very subtle spatula according to this form: then put one fine clo of lead, and tie it and hold it for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, it should be removed, and he urinates, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed. Those whose opening is small, if they are medicated with the lead clo, as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its place are blue-colored, because none are born who have the opening at the head of the penis, which is why they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come up to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and are held the head of the rod and the cup as well as the waist of a feather, so that the pointed one falls in the middle, as it behoves; and keep from a decrease of blood that often comes, and if it happens, then the sponge of those who sponge blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the vesicles of the rod Many times these pimples come in the rod, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh; and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones; so it behoves you to prick them with one fine needle, and scrape and clean all of them, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess is malignant, of bad color and thick, then it is necessary that you bring cautery to it. When you have seared it, and if the abscess is in some part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the abscess which is inside first; and when it is joined, then cure the outside. For when you cure it all together, it is not sure that the head of the shaft will not be pierced, and comes blackening and corruption in its shaft and where it joins; so it is necessary to shave everything that is black and corrupted, then lie on the plaster made from apple bark, quince and figs, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with two things together: for bleeding and for corruption. And if the head of the shaft is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you put or lead a cane of wood in the shaft, and urinate on the patient; and when the skin is raised at the head of the shaft which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the shaft is delivered from all sides.
And if it is a painful thing to discuss this, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one spatula at the head of the shaft and the skin; then cut apart neatly between two, and put in one fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out.
of the circumcision
Circumcision is not a wound of continuity like the others; nevertheless, when we make this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest to salvation.
I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have seen most of the masters and scholars who performed circumcision using  one dal [a unit of measurement], and with force, and with one whole novacule; thus they cut the foreskin because there are two layers, and by chance if one cuts the top one and the bottom one remains.
Or the covering is needed, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done with a hot iron it is not certain that the point of the limb; and in the purification of the angle by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they had no need for purification, and I have wanted this.
From the purification which is done with force to the whole line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Because when you press your hand, it cuts equally in one place to the whole thread; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and that the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only force him to bind the thread around the rod, and then let him enjoy himself in all ways that you can. then make it be between your hands straight, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the stick and blow or heart, and bring it up until the head of the stick is in; then cleanse it well of the filth which is assembled there, then tie the place sealed with a double thread, then tie it under .i. poc a .i. other lien; and hold it as .ij. days by the second lien to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the .ij. liens, then lift the heart upwards carefully and bring the head of the stick;
then make it be between your hands straight, and put the forces between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the stick and blow or heart, and bring it up until the head of the stick is in; then cleanse it well of the filth which is assembled there, then tie the place sealed with a double thread, then tie it under .i. poc a .i. other lien; and hold it as .ij. days by the second lien to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the .ij. liens, then lift the heart upwards carefully and bring the head of the stick; then let the blood come out little by little, for it is the moist; and put powder on and on the powder .i. drapeil glued with a yolk of an egg cooked tempered with rose water, mixed with good rose oil and fresh, and let it remain until the next day, and cure him with another cure as long as he is healed.
The form of the forces at purification is this: the two heads be held and be sharp, and the heads also as large as the palm equally:
The error of the cauterization is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the skin forms an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, use pliers, and then cut.
And if they pierce for three days, and that which is below the shaft is swollen, let it be left until the abscess has subsided, and lightly peel; then cut it as much as you can move, and guard the part of the shaft, it will not harm him.
Therefore, heal the wound with a powder of things as we have said or treated in the powders, and if you cut beyond the kernel excessively, and it goes upwards, it will do no harm; therefore heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is from an obstruction of the stone, or blood clotted, or a bowel, or fleshy mass, or similar things that we have said in the division;
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the neck or urethra of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on their knees; and their feet should be placed on their back, and stretch their belly from the upper part towards the back, and restrain the patient's arms as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constrained to express the stone upwards, so that the urine is released;
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with every instrument that is called a "syringe," of which this is the form: And it should be made of fine, light silver, like the feather of a bird; and its length should be a palm and a half long, and fine at the head.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie at the head one piece of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and oil of olive and tepid water;
then put gently the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the bud; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and feel the patient come until the thing is empty, and this is not done according to this order unless for those who lead or where it goes is twisted; then are the threads at all the wool piece and piece, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and do correct the urine;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of diseases of the bladder
When scalds or blood come in the bladder, or there is rot gathered there, and you see it distilled sharp waters and medicines, so make to all the instrument that is called “clepsydra”, and that is the form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the parts are shaped so that the medicine would be such that it well stops the penis without addition, so that if one can draw out the moisture, and expel when necessary;
and when you see to give your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the tube in the moisture, and pull on the string that is inside; so you will draw the moisture into the tube, and then firmly push back the string inside; so the moisture will go inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
and this is the form of the clyster which one clysters the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of brass, and the head is higher; and below to i. inch or the joining of the shoulders; then take a bladder of sheep and put therein the moisture which you want to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed of a strong double thread, and heat i. ounce of that moisture on the fire; then put the head of the clyster into the member, then restrain your hand upon the bladder at all the moisture coming, until the patient feels that that moisture is come to the bladder;
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make i. circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put i. strong thread into these pierced holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles i. dal, and put inside that which you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do so as you have done with the bladder, of pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as reins, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work of size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hare, and grieves the patient his penis, and he may feel it many times, and then becomes hard; and with much of these leaps the foundations are formed; and it is light the cure of children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old men, and is as the middle for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter of those who have large stones, than of those who have small.
And when we come to the cure, it is convenient first to purify the patient by clyster, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the bowels. For it often hinders seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate them and move them down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and moves out of its place at times; then make him sit between your hands supported, and his hands be below his hips, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then the groin and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into it above. And if it does not fall at the touching of all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it into its foundation, and touch the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press on your finger, and push it outwards where you want to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; then put the spatula cutting, for this is its shape:
And make between that which is between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and let it be right upon the stone, and the two sides should be even or foundation, and let the waist be like a traverse so that it is wide outside and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large;
by chance the press if the two sides which are or foundation, that it should go forth without work; and know that there is such stone where it has angles, and margins: so it is grieved to pass through; and if there is some which is below, seeming like a glant, and round, of whose issue is light.
To him therefore where it has angles and margins, make the waist larger; and if it does not go out, then it is necessary that you extract with pliers which are also like a file at the chief, in order to move extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below one instrument subtle curved at the chief; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge one pock lou the opening, and if the sans decort, then strain of vitriol;
and if there are more than one stones, first thrust the largest one to the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then the trail is forced, and the small ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, it should be softened, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the leaks cannot close; but all the same you force to drain, or to break up with tweezers, until you take it out in pieces
and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put on top one cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to appease the hot abscess; then resolve the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, moisten the place well with oil and water, then cure it with diafynicon ointment and basil ointment, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and by this the urine is retained, which is known in such manner that without leaping with the urine: therefore you should put in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and burn it.
Then raise the wound of height and width and seal, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on top.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the rod leads, and fixed in there, and urine cannot flow out; so cure it of what I say again, that you cut it many times, and one excuse for cutting by this cure. I have already proved this thus.
Take one piece of iron shaped according to this form and have it three-angled, fixed in a coal.
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the iron gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the iron in your hand on the stone again and again, as long as you can feel the stone from the other side; soon then will come the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. Soon then will it be broken, and jump out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this because of anything that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the shaft straight against the stone between the two threads, then withdraw it, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
Few things happen that a stone is in women, and if it happens at any time, then the cure is grievous, and is forbidden for three things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well knowing who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is so much deeper than the stone of the man, for which reason it must be made a deeper incision, and great fear there is.
And if necessity arises in this case, it is necessary that you seek a midwife well knowing, and at points the true one will be found. And if you cannot find one, point to any chaste midwife skilled; and present her to a woman who knows well the life of women, or one who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her concerning the incision of the stone;
And look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it behoves her to push in her buttocks or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she constricts it below her buttocks, and she recommends that she pushes her buttocks or upon the sick one, and seeks and presses her left hand upon the bladder.
If she finds it, then it behoves her to move it from great to great from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut upon the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the con, where it is moved appeared, and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her buttocks above or below the stone, and let the tail be at first small.
then push the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so accurately at the wound until the stone can be pushed out, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins. If you know the resemblances to know the outcome.
And if the stone does not go out, put ground vitriol on it and hold it there for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, until the stone comes out, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones to help you in your work.
And if the stone does not come out, and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on the place and bind it with strips and bandages, and do not begin again those things, and leave the stone and do not touch it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the place is healed, then return to your work until the stone comes out.
of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing else than an assemblage of moisture or white syfac, which is the content of the yolk sacs, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this is the skin of the yolk between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have a single spot.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the yolks, and this matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the yolks, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is or white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, that is, long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the openings, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then the abscess is ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the openings and the white as such, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you should examine the whole introitus, for its form is as described above. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer judge of this which is inside.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer judge of this which is inside. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, upon a thing somewhat high, and put under him many cloths;
then sit on his left side, and command the minister that he sits on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the sides;
then take the spatula left, and cut the skin of the sides among them, from the long to toward the armpit, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the sides up to the white fascia, and the eschar gently according to your strength;
Then pierce the sac full of water with i.  large openings, and extract all the water, and then put your bandages, and tighten the sac upward; and do not touch the heart of the cysts, but only the sac; cut all or by pieces evenly the flesh of it subtly, that if you do not cut it wisely, the water will return;
And if the wound saut is in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the sac; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the cysts with a suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the dripping of blood; then cut the cyst all the way to the suspender, and extract the sac, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches; so cut the other part as you did the first evenly, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound a linen cloth moistened in rose oil;
and put on top another linen cloth moistened in wine and oil, and put the two pads on top, and put doubled cloth on top of that, and tie it onto all the linen according to this shape:
Then take two cloths, and make them into padding according to this image and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit; and the other two from the head over the two angles, and let the entire restraint be assembled in the buckle of the breeches;
And at no time is this cautery medicine applied in place of a piece of iron, and it is that you prick one cautery with a thin knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the liquid is revealed;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac with once, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything. And keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and move guarding of a loss of blood, and movements that the works of size;
And if nothing is done contrary to you, or abscess, or bleeding, or other thing, take care of what opposes you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, administer a perforation as I have told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said that the watery root is there,
then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with all the spatula wide, and put the perforation long along the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water runs out;
then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and let the remaining water drain out, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not let the water flow into the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a pen or the instrument which one uses to treat the water of the dropsy, for its form is described above; and widen 1 finger's width the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after 6 months or until then, and when it is assembled like before, and so will pass the patient his days.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the section of this root there is fear in more dispositions, for which it seems to me that one better leaves it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the testicles; and it is by many causes.
That is to say by excess of sour and acrid humor, which is spread to the testicles, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and does not find pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
And by adventure there are some abscesses grievous and painful, and of a dark colour, and sometimes comes from our artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
When it is by our artery, then it is known by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers; and it does not behoove that you touch it.
The one which is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression of the touch of the fingers,
and one can well make a cut on this shape, and on the other limbs; and it is that you cut the heart of the groin, then the egg is on top, and the trail furthers from white syfac, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.
If the egg is already sodden with these new limbs, then it is necessary that you draw the egg, and cut;
and if it is airy at the syfac, or in those who are inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that tent, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the char is or its rear, then it befits that you cut it whole, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when the works are accomplished, then employ the wound of wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Of the abscesses of the testicles
This is an abscess enclosed in an envelope resembling one boar's jowl, with the softening of the testicles, and if the patient moves loudly when going.
and the cure of this disease is as well prescribed as fearful as this one before.
and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It befits that you make the patient sit on one elevated seat, then put the suspensory of the testicles down to your two hands. To all the vessels that are near to the shaft, and the masters braid them, and they extend.
Then cut with the sharp spade wide through the vessels, until they are uncovered.
And then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
Then put a needle where there is one double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come, and tie it straight to the other end. Then the blade cuts straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and it treats the corrupted moisture.
Then heal the wound like the others where you prevent a bow, so that no vessel is leaking that nourishes one of the ends;
because through these [vessels], there comes no harm, and since life comes to all the vessels, it is necessary to draw blood from all the vessels; so that the tissue does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries up and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the shoulder The occurrence of this fracture is by the section that comes to the shoulder, or the extension on the belly in the part of the arms, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners;
and this fracture is either of the shoulder or of the extension of it, and these two ways of much come from: whether by percussion, or leap, or wrestling, or raising a heavy load, and similar things;
and the signs when it is of the extension of the shoulder, are that there are small and small pains, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and is the abscess equal up to the top, because of that the pus runs quickly along the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the pus, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and is the abscess diverse appearances, under the skin near, and that is for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
And sometimes the intestines with the pus, and are retained within, and makes great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, because one must avoid it.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to bring the intestine into his hand inside the wound, if he can enter it. Then either sew it on its neck between your hands, and raise the hips.
Then extend the heart upward, and cut all the skin of the groin along. Then put inside the folds of the waist incisions according to what you need to open the wound, and such that the gut may be able to issue.
Then peel away the skin that is beneath the skin of the joints, until the white underlying tissue is uncovered from all sides.
Then thrust your index finger into that which follows the joint, into that which is between the white underlying tissue that is beneath the skin of the bone and between the second layer.
And depart that which is behind the bone, and between the second layer. And then move with your right hand into the core of the joint, and keep the white underlying tissue in front on your left hand, and lift the bone upward toward the waist; And command the assistant to extend the bone upward, and untie that which is behind the ligament.
and if he has any of the intestine wrapped or white and hard, and if you find any such thing, put it back into the belly below;
then take a needle or a thread that is 1 thick made of 10 threads, and put it in the back part of the white spot which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs which appear from the threads, until there are 4 threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the white spot, which we have said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong thread of 2 parts. then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them forming 2 parts, so that none of the vessels which nourish them can enter in, except for pus coming from an abscess. and place it directly the linen according to the first linen long 2 fingers of that one, and after these 2 linens leave out the sfefac which is below the heart of the groin the great of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is below the skin of the groin, as much as the sinew and the bone, as we have said before.
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the linen that we have said. And at no time is cauterized the white sfefac that we have said, after the incision, for fear of a decrease in blood.
For this happens many times, and let the linen be until it dries by itself; and if it lags in drying, then be it risen with hot water, and put upon it that which we have said, until it dries.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of a flesh hernia
In this practice, I have never seen anyone who dared to make the cure with iron.
And the ancient ones said that it is made like the root which is assembled to the bone, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the incision above or lightly below.
Then cover it in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who operate, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the angles, as we have said, and opens them; and do not pull any of the intestines to the corners, and if they are pulled, it is bad, and repair all hours.
But nevertheless, if it remains too long in this point, the wound or ulcer grows, as long as the intestines are pulled.
and this happens by the extension of the soft tissue which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes softened and swollen its parts and open;
and the cure of this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies soundly on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with the width according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the soft tissue which is under the skin that follows it, then take the lead and put it over the place appearing of the soft tissue;
and the press on the front of the belly, then count the two apparent veins of the liver on the top of the back, and count one and the other;
then extract the top of the back, and do not cut any of the liver or extend anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the hernia of the intestines;
then cure it by the cure of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if you cleanse and cure the wound, as long as it is healed.
The liver is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the sacs that are inside are softened, and it becomes visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts the skin that is softened on the natural skin; then brings together the two lips at a seam, and if you see, first sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four seams firmly; then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the bandaging
Know that bandaging is common in our law, and for this reason I would like not to speak of it much in this book; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is that the masters should be able to answer when they are asked about it, and know how to cure it; and the other, because we often need bandaging from certain animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, calves, and others. I therefore say that bandaging is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. In the one we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and pliable; then we take them in our hand, until they are set back and you no longer feel them.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to .ij. ways as men: one if it is between the .ij.  organs appears also like the figure of nature of a woman, where it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin like a penis and .ij. genitals. And the cure of the man and the woman is that you cut the joined parts all, and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
of the tenting
Tenting is a joined part on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that's the cure. It is necessary that you cut off the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and lightly cut it; and don't go too deep, that bleeding doesn't come, then the care of another cure until it is healed; and to another part that is born at the mouth of the vagina, and the  emple [?], and perhaps by chance it jumps out, and it is according to the resemblance of a cow, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "cow disease." If it is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic  if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the partus is small; and is natural by birth, or accident by illness that came to it; or it is by a joint adhered, or by subtle or thick mucus, and it is made in the belly, or in the ribs, or below, or wherever it may be; and prevents conceiving, and pregnancy, and by chance the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the gaze of the bail. If the obstruction is proximate appearing, it will want at your two fingers or to the rear.  If it is of subtle mucus, and it is proximate to 2 volumes, then hasten, and the round thus: put your two fingers together, and the woman be on her back, legs spread; then being the 2 volumes formed, as long as the subtle mucus is rounded, and the obstruction is covered; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and lay the woman at home each day, so that she cannot move. And if the mucus is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with the spatula similar to myrtle leaf. If the obstruction is of flesh born, then suspend it with the awl and cut it; and have the medicines astringent blood, as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with a handful of egg; then administer a bandage of wide cloth, so that the wound cannot close; and thus for a long time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then be cured of other cures until it is healed. And when in the belly comes flesh born, it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is an abscess festered. Because the abscess festering which is in the belly, one should not touch to make.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without customary care become old and hard; and we have said in the division the appearances of them, and their signs, and I will say here those which resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the hardened ones, when they are full inside the buttocks, and they do not appear to feel except with a probe. Those that are at the mouth of the buttocks, you can feel, are those that you can cure. It befits therefore that you put the woman in a cold house, then the hardened one as tenaculum, and the cut at its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the fire for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if there comes a bleeding from them, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and rind of pomegranates and gallnuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit with honey and asafoetida, and make one plasters on her back. And if it heals, it is good. If not, make her apply leeches to the back and breasts without hurting; then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it there. And when the abscess has calmed, cure the place of it with ointment until it is healed; and the one called "albathir" is red, and is similar to one chief asperity, so it befits to cut it as I have said the hardened one; and then cure it until it is healed.
of the buttocks abscesses
Many ways of abscesses come in the buttocks, such as chancre and purulent abscess, and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It befits therefore that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the buttocks, which is not of abscesses that boil; and if you want to know the work of iron, see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.  Therefore do not hasten to pierce, but let it die down until the pain is appeased; and then make the sick person sit on one seat, and have two small seats where he leans, and supports his back and assembles his feet to the parts outside the leg; and be his thighs spread out, and put his arms below his knees, and bind them well with a good linen; then suck him to the right side, and administer the instrument by which the mouth of the buttocks is opened, from which comes after its form; and it befits that when you want to administer this instrument, you first stick the point in order to know the depth of the buttocks, so that what enters inside the instrument does not come deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it befits to cover the depth of the buttocks with cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it befits that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and you make it with your hand soft, it befits to cut it at the head, at the spathulate left; and when the boil is emptied, it befits that you put in the wound tented moils in rose oil, or in green oil; and put the tent further from the wound to the depth of the buttocks, and put outside on the buttocks and on the loin linen net moistened in water or malves are cooked; then cure it after two days of ointment coming before that, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the buttocks and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristolochia are cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is returned in the buttocks, it befits that you beware of cutting iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
The midwife must first know the figure of natural childbirth and its signs. When you see a woman press her belly inward and desire to smell the air, then the child is hastening to be born. Then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the head comes out first, and the second follows with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child emerges quickly. Because when it descends onto its head, then the second follows with it, and the womb is cleared of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes out on its feet, or it comes further from the body, or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes out on her belly, or the hip, and it is turned by chance onto her neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and to avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how you should help them.
If the child comes out on its head by a natural birth, and the woman giving birth is groaning, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a saddle or have the women hold her; and rise its nature of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs with the small spatula whose shape is here: and cut the secondine, and strike its finger until the moisture that is within comes out; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fenugreek mulch with sesame oil; then make her inhale and sneeze from condiments, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: so now the child will come out. And if the two hands are out, then you must reset them gently back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and raise her feet up; then tilt the stool over the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the tipping; and if the hands still cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the elbow which is before placed, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
from the exit of the child on its feet When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push up. and then turn it back and forth, until it is even.
then pinch i. the feet and extend it back and forth.
Can he jump up to the hips, if commanded to take, and cause him to sneeze from condition; if he jumps, if God wills.
And if it is not done as we have said, turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For therefore it is easily fixed.
And if it does not come as we have said, then take a small amount of alum, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman within and outside this ointment, Then have him sit upright, bent until under the ribs;
and when it is softened underneath, have him put one collar of mirr beneath, and leave it there for an hour; then have him sit upon one seat, then have him sneeze and strain his mouth and nose, and take his belly gently, for the child leaps now. of the issue of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands pocket to pocket.
of the exit of the child coming through with a wide hand it is necessary to devise to bring back the hand if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman rise and leave.
If it cannot move, place it on its back, I., the bed, and straighten the legs.
Then administer the muscle treatment that I have recounted.
And if she does not give birth, place her on a seat, then study to bring back the hand. And extract the child according to the natural figure, and have her sneeze, and command her to strain as long as the child issues forth.
of the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned toward the back of his mother It is proper that the midwife grasps his hand, then turns it little by little, and gently lifts the ear.
and when it is equalized, she places it on the soft lining of the table and oil, as we have said, then commands her to move little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on one stool, and command her to strain herself; and make her sneeze. of this same manner to all the back
of this same manner to all the back When it comes to being treated in this manner to all the back, so cover the back with your finger, until the moisture is emptied.
and if the child can't raise up its face and neck, so cover the head, that it may not be held back, and let the child die;
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command to the woman that she do not give any times.
of the issues of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named;
I know these things, which are multiplied, and are divided by the one who devises them, which is bound to the mind;
And at no time do they come out as naturally as all under, as we have said.
And if they come out roughly, then the cure is as we have said, and let the boil be subtle, and make quickly and lightly what it does; and do thus as it deserves to heal. of many children
of many children At no time are they formed in the marsh, i.e., one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage,
and it behooves the bailiff to know all this, because by chance similar things happen; if done according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat a woman with a dead fetus in the womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be laid on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister takes the hair of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not be treated at the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with marshmallow and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the bale his hands with these oils and these mucilages; then put them in the mare lightly, then bring one loin where she puts the teats that be suitable to those,
and take ward if the child is appeared that it descends upon its head; if place the needles in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the groin or near the ribs
and if the descent is on the feet, he inserts it or a dagger and the sides.
and it is necessary that he holds the needle in his right hand, and places the bend between his fingers of the left hand, and pushes it with all his hand lightly, and inserts the needle into any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
Then fit against another bone, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
And then make it equal in moving from one side to the other, so that it moves easily, and let the bones be toothed so that it holds, as is the form here.
And if a part remains, then oil some of its joints with oil, and put them in that part, and pull the other part.
And if nothing remains of it, then put this bone or higher up its place, and do this until it moves all out.
And if one hand comes forward from the other, and it cannot be brought back for the tightening, then you should wrap it in a cloth, until it sets;
Then hold it at the joint of the palm or at the edge, and thus you should do with the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the child's shoulder is large and it sticks out at the end, or it has a sharp point gathered together, So it is necessary that you thrust the pointed spatula between your two, and make the tip and extract the water. or you take it to the instrument called "almidach," because of which its form comes with the instruments or chapter that is after this one.
and thus, in the same way, do the children naturally have a great head; and then pull out the bones with pliers.
and if the head jumps out and is forcibly held in place, it should be split, as long as the moisture that is or worse has issued forth
and if it cannot exit, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce it until the moisture flows.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the mare is light.
And if it is lodged in the belly or breast, then it befits you to extract it with one cloth wrapped around your hand; and rub the belly or breast until the moisture within is dried.
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then hold his hand firmly with your palm from the wrist, and pull it until the mouth of the belly button. then he puts  one or two, and the wood is;
and if the mouth of the marsh is contracted by abscesses that have come there, then it does not need to be worked on; but moist and fatty things are required to be administered; and administer plasters, and soak in softening and moisturizing water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it even, then administer what we have said in the living child;
and if one cannot do this, then treat it by parts, and leave nothing of the secondary part.
And when you have done this, if it comes with an abscess similar to those that come in the marrow;
and if a discharge of blood comes, then put it in a sharp poultice, and administer other cures to it.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one fetus had been dead, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other. After long time there came an abscess in the belly, and it swelled so much that it opened and began a great suppuration.
I was called to the cure, and I pondered long time, and could not sew up the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after some days another. I marveled greatly because for this one whose belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted the wound, and in tracing my hands over the bones, until the woman was better. And visited the woman long times like this, and she had a little bit of swelling from there;
and I have recorded this chapter for those that, when the masters find a strange thing, they may know how to help
to bring the bone back into its place
Here after comes the form of the forceps, which we have in the books; and to two turns of two arms of two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle than the restricting ones, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube .i. be two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees .i. should be, and long one palm and a half and in the middle of the two limbs be two adjustments of this same tube, which are fastened on one and the other, half a palm long or a finger more
and these two adjustments are put into the mouth of the tube to open when one turns the two horns
Another form, resembling it more subtly and lighter, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the resemblance of pliers and have two arms, two joints, such as you see, of one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the belly with all the instruments, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet dangling and her legs spread; then put the two arms, joints assembled together in the belly, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with all the instrument, such as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the belly, as long as the patient does what she wants.
This instrument are all surmounted, and are multiplied their appearances; and when the viewer has seen them appear, so much is more hastening the work, and more high as men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you do not have appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, so it behooves you to command the woman to retain her abdomen, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and restrain her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps for this, well is good.
If one is to not do this, take one pot and make one perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialgine and centaury.
All these herbs or none of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put a strap or perforation of the pot, and the other chief in the mouth of the marsh.
And keep it there until the vapors come from within the marsh; then let it be expelled, as we have said. If the second time is jumped upon hastily. And if it remains after this cure, and is not better, command the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in ointment of tallow, and then put it into the wound.
and she seeks out the second one; and when she finds it, she grasps it and extends it piece by piece straightly, so that the marrow does not fall out during extraction. but it is necessary to move it lightly to right and left, and then pull; so it will come out and be freed.
And if the mouth of the marrow is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not from all of that which we have said, then guard that you do not apply to the breast;
but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the vagina, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then enema it with ointment tetra-pharmacon;
if she will bear it and put it back, and come forth; but nonetheless, when she bears it then there comes bad odor to the stomach and head, and pales the woman.
Thus it is necessary then suitable fumigations to these: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dry figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of the flowers and the secondine is this:
And it is like a cage in appearance, and one puts the head delicate in the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
And let the fumigation be over the embers, and the tar as long as it is smoked, and begin another.
To examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by some subtle syfags: So it befits the midwife that she pierces that syfag at its place, and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guards the bandage so that she does not touch it.
then puts on the wound half in wine and oil, then the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, put on a patch of plank, and let him leave it for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to rooms.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from the clotting of a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that clot: if it be cured, as we have said of the cauterization with lead.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are knotted, and thicker than those which come from near the foundation outside, or in the space of the two parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that knotting is old, it works, and even if moisture brings white or subtle boils,
and sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who have them or by ejection or windiness when the patient expels, and by chance some jump out toward.
And if the fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the joint of the hip, and up to the knee.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing. And it is that you put your finger or base, and thrust a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has tortuosity, then put in a tent of fine wool or one hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tent or hair to your touch;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out through its opening or windiness or worm, as we have said; know that it does not pierce; so hurry to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, then urine flows out, and it cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is pierced to the joint of the hip, then the tendon comes to its place. If there is no twisting and the pain is inward, then it is that it is bowed there, and it is not worth medicine nor remedy by ointment.
And in these fistula no cure has been found other than labor, and vanity of the fools who interfere with them.
In those that are neither pierced nor old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift the legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then insert a tent of linen, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent comes to.
If the patient feels it around the base, then you should put your index finger there;
and feel then that the tent has pierced it; and whether it is discovered or you feel between your finger the soft tissue or the bone, then you know that it is passed through; If it is not worked on, one cannot heal it.
One says however that one can heal none well, but this happens little;
and the aid that one does to it, if it is done, one must cauterize carefully according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and bring it all hot into the fistula, as far as it goes toward the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charcoal-colored bits are burned, which resemble an eye's feather;
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that charcoal is issued, then the cure of ointment binding flesh and soldering.
If he is thus healed, that is good. If this, otherwise it cannot be healed.
and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the depth which is the foundation, and between your tooth and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering down to the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then apply the cautery after, as far as it comes to the head of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and will shrink; then remove those hairs that seem a feather of an owl, and leave nothing of them.
And if the blood will not stop, and flows between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery assembles two good things: namely, the burning of those joined hairs, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture;
then the cure with tents moistened in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound is bowed, and if the burned hairs are within the wound;
then cure the wound of eyelids quickly healing tough flesh, and are the dry medicines.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if the fistula comes to almost the bottom, and is separated from the body, it is put into its place or foundation, and examine it.
If you feel the tent, and between two or the cloth or silk, or where it is about to pierce, then there is only a way of faith and hope, by administering one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put bandages and treat it like first.
and do not let them be too much embedded, that you do not cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and come the secretions by their own will; then treat it, as we have said.
then treat it, as we have said. perhaps then it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the membrane once it has been cut near the foundation, or by bandage or another pointed instrument. then remove carefully the char from the wound as much as you can
then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part outside the base; this is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are this way: and when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is or cost by the base against the skin above then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And he puts 1 thread twisted into 2, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the top.
If it is pierced into the edge of the bottom inside, then extract the thread from that one pierced, just as you put your finger or foundation.
And treat the top of the thread, and assemble the 2 heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it be for 1 day or 2;
and restrain it no times, until the threads join those that are between two, and fall together;
then cure the wound until it is closed and healed
If the fistula does not open, make it open in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not behoove to make a wound opening if it is too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very much like a pointed and trenching tool; and on the other hand no, for that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, as much as a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture,
and again it is applied with a point of clear water or a drop of blood, and has the color of flesh.
and the cure of those who have them in the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to strain themselves to go into chambers, as long as the foundations are there, and the hairs appear. if you hasten, and can with tongs, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots;
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one draping cloth, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and bind them to your two hands, then cut them, and powder above with some hot powders that are in the place of cautery. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed;
and if the foundation cannot issue, then give the patient a blistering enema with a sharp and bitter one to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it may issue openly;
and if the patient bears up, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
If it is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw the thread upwards and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and if it is wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood;
then place on the foundation one drapelet moistened in rose oil or in cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it until they are dry, and when they are dried, treat with ointment and other treatment until he is healed.
dryness of the veins or foundation Many times dryness of the veins occurs in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and the medicine is no use.
Then it behooves you to scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the bark from above, which does not leave it moist. then treat until it is healed as it should
and if it cannot heal, begin the shaving again more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and is scraped. then treat until it is healed.
when trembling Ant is a small appearance of fault in front of the body, and goes much through it.
And sometimes it is found cold, and one feels it also like dead from shivering, and comes in the whole body, and more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a chain of a goose feather, or a very strong vulture feather, and put that chain on the shivering, until the red circles stain the shivering all around. Then turn your hand on the whole chain until you cover all around the shivering, and put it through it, and scrape the shivering from its roots.
And if you see it, so make this of a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
Do not pierce it, but make it hold at the two [ends], and make it press. And if you see it, so cauterize the edge as is before in the chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster. Sometimes one makes a clyster of silver or copper, or melted iron or chainmail; and sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Those therefore which one administers in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
And it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and on one side there are 2 holes, and on the other 1;
And the belly is where one puts the medicines of a beast bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes,
And between each pore one must put space, then put into these pores one strong thread of a thread spun tightly in 10 or however much it is turned, and assemble the belly as if it were a sheep. And when the medicine is inside, then he has in front of the instrument a strong thread, then enema; and this is the shape of the circle.
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or beaten egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently.
then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together until it is all gone, then removes the enema, and raises the patient's legs to the side.
and if the medicine wants to issue, so the skin as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night entirely, so it is more great help.
And if you clysters him in sickness of belching of belly, and the medicine hastens to issue, so it recommences until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are or at the foundation, or abscess, so let the clyster be as subtle as for one child;
and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is restrained:
of wounds
We have already said in the division the cure of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made by, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and from what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cuts from swords and knives, or by lances or clubs or arrows, or similar things.
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, so take care if it's from a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the abscess is hot: so let it bleed from the cephalic vein itself even if it comes little blood from the wound, and let it bleed on the contrary of the seared part;
and avoid the patient repletion of wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let him reduce his meat, and drink no wine, nor eat much meat;
and place on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in wine of stipe;
and if there is no abscess hot, then place on the wound, if it is fresh in all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later;
and if the arm has been moved, place upon it some ointment, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together with tents, then assemble them by suture, as I shall say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed bone and hangs, and holds only by one point, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore tough flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and cooked barley, also pulses, and similar things.
And if you find yourself with rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, so cut away all the rot, and throw it out, then treat it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you must sever the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put in this powder which welds together as if the fire had cauterized them.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely. And apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly, until it dries well and joins all its blood.
And then bind it well, and leave it untied, if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one has neither incense nor dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
And if the wound has healed, even in its state, then do not put on this powder at all.
but apply some boiled medicinal oils or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals. then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with very fine pincers;
and I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between this one and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, then there is nothing else to do but let it heal, and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; And do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member.
But let it be the medicine warm, such as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cupped wash also in sweet water, and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist unguents.
And if the wound is large, so it cut and tied with bandages, then the care until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and she is full of pus, then pierce or lower her.
And if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then stop it with a bandage, and apply a ligature, and cauterize as is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat or the guts are cut, and the conduit is kept, because through which the meat goes, then stitch the heart onto the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form; And then the constraint happens regularly, and let him for a few days, then the treatment of remedies drying until it is healed.
And if the wound has made an impression in the bone, so desire. And if there are fragments of bone, treat them all as you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound heals. and be sure to loosen and straighten the opening;
And if the wound is fresh, put the powder on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of a lance or knife wound
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, see if from the wound there is air coming out where the patient has been wounded; then know that the wound is mortal.
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put any powder to it at the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain in depth. and return to the heart, and warn the patient. but I put attractive ointment, and bind it 2 times a day.
and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there does not come any spasm, nor bad trembling of the heart nor movements of the arm; and when you see the good arrangements, then know that the wound is saved. Heal it therefore with bandages and other dressings, as long as it is healing;
and if it cannot heal and work, know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it as before.
If it is large, sew it up; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is deep into the bone, and has broken pieces, stitch the wound closed, and treat the fragments separately if they are loose. And if they are not loose, leave the wound to rot; it will lessen the extractions.
and of other wounds as other members is the judgement as we have said.
the displacement of the belly
The displacement of the belly is great and moderate and small;
Of the great wound no times jumps out any part of the bowels or the nerves of the intestines, because by that the intrusion of others.
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes worse is the small wound than the large.
for this reason one puts the intestines back in, only if they are put back warm into warm. because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they enter less easily.
and for this reason it is better to heal the small wound, because for this reason intestines are reset more easily in their place than others.
And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other sutures are common to other wounds;
but nevertheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare them.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has come out, and what needs to be done is put back in one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Soak a sponge or cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in water with boiling and cypress and spice, and raise the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and no time made this wine restraining, and it is moved that the sole for to unfurl.
And when you see the swelling depart, so moist the intestine with water or ale and the malves be cooked. for by these is aligned the entrance to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which one cauterizes hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to move the hip that we should not cut into it without great necessity.
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if you cut inside in the bend and not outside, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine protrudes out then it is put back in according to its natural form in its proper place if you are able, because it is worth doing so.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, if it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if she is below the belly;
and also if a rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you set attention to that which the swollen part is higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds put that which you have appeared
then have in your hands .i. pitiful minister who holds all the fracture in his hand and assemble the lips; and this is the common manner of sutures,
and this is the common manner of sutures, and that you pierce a needle or more, according to the quantity and width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound i.e. a space, and there stick a needle where it has i.e. a good strong thread; and pierce the two points of the skin with the two points of the scalp;
then the strain of a double thread entwined around the needle of 2 parts then assemble the two joints of the wound evenly
and then leave one two of space, and insert another needle there then tie the thread just like you did with the first needle and do not cease from doing this according to what you need of needles, until the entire wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too coarse ones do not enter well: Therefore it is necessary that they are shortened;
and it is not necessary to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin.
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the soldering;
and then blunt the points of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or drapes at the shoulder of the needles to keep them from moving and I let them stay as long as the wound is closed;
and this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for one needle or two are sufficient
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two points of the skin and the two points of the fascia together with a needle where it has one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four points together,
and when you will have pierced these four points together, then you must pull the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews the drapes;
and put space between each suture the thickness of a finger joint;
this suture is followed by a man;
and I sewed a wound one hound had on his belly,
which was pierced with a knife, and was the wound more than a palm wide, and it was two palms wide of bowels.
and the wound was in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine then because it had been for twenty-four hours.
and the wound was sutured up to the 15th day, and I treated it, and it was healed.
And the man had been judged to be dying, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine; and put half a sense more on the wound with old cotton twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle, and thrust it from the outside to the inside;
When it has pierced the core straight through, then bring the head of the suture or thread where you inserted the needle,
and make it pierce on the other side from the inside to the outside;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the furrier does skins, and that you leave once the scything of one side, and take it back on the other, as long as the stitching is fully completed.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen states properly,
is as if anyone does, who brings together the two parts naturally, and apply one end of the staff to one side and the other end to the other, in such manner:
Insert a needle or staff tip near the joint, and have them feel it only, and leave the two ends of the staff; then turn the needle and have it felt from the outer part to the inner part, the two shoulders of the body
then make them examine one and the other from the outer part to that inward, in two other shoulders of the miracle which are on the other side;
and this is the most common and usual way of suturing.
The Gauls say this saying, and no one witnesses it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each
and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly it is the stitch more painful than others in other parts of the belly
The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the art has moved it. if it renews the intestine and the outside; then put on the powder of a healing herb
if it renews the intestine and the outside; then put on the powder of a healing herb and if the art has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound heals. and sew the thread, and let the suture, and the ligature, then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed;
and if you have no medicines, then put on it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cloth, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicine in most cases when wounds are simple.
And if you doubt that the wound does not make commonality to the principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the buttocks;
and if he feels pain or rot in bowels, and it happens many times. if the enemas of black wine cleanse, and similarly if the rot comes to the intestine;
and it pierces inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal when it is rotten, and this is because of the thinness of the veins that they are, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back in as if it were an intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has turned into maggots or black, then you must tie the place that is black so that blood does not flow from it. for there are veins and arteries there.
then cut what is between the bone and put the two heads hanging from the lower part of the wound outwards so as to align the extraction when the bone falls and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if it can, restore it in some men
for because I see that a man was wounded in the belly of a lance.
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and in it he expelled stool and wind;
I put care according to what I could, and did not cease to treat until it was healed, and the bones joined.
And when I saw it join, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly; and he had no ill, but remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank.
and said any experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in this manner: Take small pieces of gauze, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the gauze has covered the opening, place it on top of the two lips,
then put one other fret after in that manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed
and close the wound. If this  chief becomes inflamed in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient
and if it is possible to tie the intestine with a fine thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is well cleansed, and then tie to the head of this thread i.e., a thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and thread it through the opening;
and this manner of suturing of limbs is not harmful except according to the way of faith and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the lower intestines, there is nothing else needed but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula", and even when it is pulled back and bent.
And a fistula is according to truth a nodule hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and is also pulled back like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in leaping it becomes clear, and at other times thick. Some times few, and other times enough;
And I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for his wickedness; or because he has hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or where there is too much swelling; or where the lesion is sluggish and the matter is of poor quality; where the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is tardy in digestion, and slow in health, and inflated by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and cures of medicines in the division.
It is fitting that I tell you the cure for fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the stomach, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the sides or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is only labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure, and you see it known, if you take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, if it curves;
and if the fistula is crooked, then encircle it with a fine tent of silk, because linen conforms to its winding and twisting.
and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot well cover it with tents, then cleanse it by one of the openings,
for moisture spreads from one opening to another, and cleanses;
then carefully probe it with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and is choked by them,
And ask well of the patient the pain he feels at pressing with your hand, and where he feels it.
And when you will truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you.
or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you. and take out the bone fragments and the corrupted flesh that are inside; and then the cure until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep and straight, then it behooves you to cut it as deep as you can, then put moistened tents in aguage medication, and push them to the head of the fistula,
then put moistened tents in aguage medication, and push them to the head of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is lodged at the bottom;
and then put poultices to close the wound until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away. If a vein or nerve does not strike or affect principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then clean the king as long as the corruption is entirely removed, then cure with things preventing flesh until it is sound;
and if it is not sound, and returns bowed as before, know that you have not gone all the way yet.
If you discover and wish as long as you are at the bottom, and remove all corruption, then restore the place;
and if it is thus healed, that is well. But if this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, you cannot succeed there; if there is no other means than to leave to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can extract it with pliers, if it is extracted with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, you extract them all, leaving none behind;
and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, if it copes with the moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in one hour, put upon the wound something hindering decay, and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
and therefore they will have more easily the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you remove only the corruption as long as the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is much part of corruption, and it comes up to the flesh of the bone; if it be necessary to be cured and covered all up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula which happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help with your work.
There was one young man about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body.
as long as the matters came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause to open;
but the doctor through their folly opened so much that the abscess opened, and in it corroded a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came out a lot of pus that all festered  and moisture from the body;
and many a while they put care to. ij. years, and there was no sage in the art of hands
as long as I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were curing him, and those who ran through the veins with great force; and became red the body of the youth's complexion, and had a yellow color.
I placed a tent in one of these pits, and then I searched all the pits.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I hastened then, and dug into one of the pits until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came as far as the inner bone.
I was one who appeared to me from the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I removed.
And I began to restore the wound with medicinals of long time, and it could not heal;
And then I tried again, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then put it back, and I tried to suture the place;
but I could not do more than I set inside one palm of the bone, and the traitor was forced to all its mass then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and joined quickly,
and it was no longer necessary to restart the work except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. Because for the evacuation of blood often, but he was cured entirely.
Because for the evacuation of blood often, but he was cured entirely. And in the place of the bone, a hard car appeared, and was of good disposition and had no discomfort nor contrary at all, neither going nor coming.
and extend the chief so that you draw the corrupted flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh on the place where you want to be, so that the skin does not blanch the flesh; and put one sliver or a plank under the bone so as to cover the corrupt flesh; and it is necessary to be as careful as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be even more careful other times.
And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh completely; then put one sliver under,
and then let there be corruption from one part to another, and let the suture be long of the corruption, that is,  as we have said
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to be cut;
and if the corruption is in the heel of the hand or the heel of the foot, then that thing is very strong, but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you. and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not oppose you.
and know that the cutters and needles for covering these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and the appearance of them. and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare at each kind of operation its instrument;
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder can dislocate either from inside or outside;
and when you will have medicated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they do not benefit then it is necessary to cover that limb until the place where the corrosion comes, if the patient escapes by those of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
if the patient escapes by those of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burnt by fire, and after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes throughout the body; so hasten you of the cover,
and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar.
If the corrosion is at the top of the thigh, then cover it, and do not allow him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, then cover it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm;
And if it comes to the arm, then cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and there is no remedy more potent than the quantity of its virtue;
And thus do it whenever the corruption comes or at the foot: if it comes in the first joint, then seize it after the other joint;
and if it comes at the foot, grasp the whole foot; and if it mounts up to the leg, seize it at the knee joint;
And if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to death.
And the manner of covering or dressing the limb is that you bind it above and below. And extend one linen cloth under the lower ligature, and another linen cloth over the upper ligature, and you shall dissect the flesh which is between the two ligatures to one spatula-width, as long as the bone is uncovered;
Then cover it or so, and put one sheet of linen on each side so that the sore does not touch a healthy place. and may another lesion and abscess come to the patient's shoe.
And if blood flow comes when you work, then cauterize the place well. or you put on some powders that restrain, then return to your medicine until it is complete
Then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
He had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corruption came first in the arch of his foot, until it encompassed the whole foot.
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover his foot, and he was healed.
and long time after that the corrosion returned to him, at two of the hand, and he came to me
and I put upon him things  pounded after the purification of the body, and could not cease the corrosion
and he begged me to cut off his hand, and I refused, because I had hope of pounding the material. and also beware that if he cuts his hand, that he does not die, for the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired of all things, and returned to his land, and took care to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have recounted this tale for the purpose that one might do otherwise, if they are in need.
Sometimes an abscess comes in a fleshy place, and stays so long that it causes great swelling of the body. and then bursts and pierces, and in jumping the swelling, remains the place bruised, as if some vessels. And the skin which is above is also as subtle as one thin cloth of silk, and does not pierce until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a malady is called "Sain".
but if it is so elongated that it comes to the bone by force, then it is called «fistula»;
and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thin, like a sheet; and do not let it hurt because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin is healed, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thickened with flesh, then treat it with this enema:
look if the breast is large and the bowel within it has a foul odor, then administer an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: Take thus, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to boil in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in a clyster into the groin, and extract the pus; and let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
do this many times, until the chest is defused, and the fear is removed;
and at no time is it (to be) enema'ed with water of ashes, when this medicine isn't present, and it is that you take ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top;
Then the flow, and in the enema, until you know that the breasts are well formed.
And if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then give an enema of water and honey in which there is a piece of litharge ground. or you can administer an enema with honey and sweet wine, for honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and wine makes the body warm;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well purified, if the clyster of those who make birth in them,
and that you take a plaster defined, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you administer it with some medicines and unguents, about which I have spoken of the properties or treatment of unguents;
and if the opening of the breast is small and the tube of the enema cannot enter there, then widen it with an iron a bit, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or ointment basilican, as long as it is widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so leave it alone only as much as the cloth or the suppository can enter
and if the pus that lies above, then cut or more below where it is Because when the pus is in full form, then do not let flesh enter it; and if you cannot cut below the breast as you see, If it is set up in such a manner that the bone goes to its lowest point.
and if you cannot cover the chest as you wish, If it is set up in such a manner: that the bone goes gently downward, and nothing of the bone is left; and take medicinal substances to put on the chest,
and be placed upon it a cloth of linen that covers the whole chest; then cover with force the opening of the chest, which is one finger width wider than the first. then place ointment on another cloth according to the size of the opening, and put it on the pierced wound of the chest to align the bow, and do not remove the large bandage outwards except after many days once.
and he who is outside the pierced wound of the chest, often removed to remove the bow, and know what runs from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible.
and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or no
and when your medicine has spread in this manner, and you see nature leaping above the chest wound, if you know that the breast is healing now, and approaching health;
and then unbind it in the morning, or the third day, and when you unbind the wound, if you change one other cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bowed undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, so do not despair of health.
For health approaches. For there are men whose healing is slow in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
And if the breast lies bowed undigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
And if the chest is slow to heal and is swollen, apply medicines drying in substance and dry in virtue. Such as ointment of diaconite, because it contains much vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
Take diafonite ointment, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of aged wine in substance;
then  confect it and use it; and the same is made honey cooked  mixed, when inflammation has been defined
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire. and then you mix it into one cloth, and place it over the chest, and every time administer a long  aristolochia and roots of lis celestial, which is also like flour of chickpeas and centaury.
and roots of lis celestial, which is also like flour of chickpeas and centaury. And in the use of simple or compound [medicines]: grind them, and make them into powder, and put on top the honey that I have said, and use it. And if the wound is lengthy, and is not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is lengthy, and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption has come deep into it, and makes an impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the angle
Panares is an abscess that arises below the finger joint of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other places;
and when it is neglected and care is not taken, then there comes another abscess, And they cut and throw away so much as long as it cuts at the root of the joint, and by chance all.
And the cutting comes to the bone, as long as there is pain and pus, and the shoulder is very wide, and the color is livid.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all then it is necessary that you cut away with iron all the superfluous flesh that is around the joint Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and it begins to prick, and it becomes inflamed, then it is necessary that you place a rag under the nail where it pricks the flesh, and the head on top, and cut that one carefully and lightly, and put above the remaining of the flesh medicinal herbs burning and corrosive to remove everything.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and treat it further, because as long as the bone is corrupt there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the two bones are broken, then cut it in one place as has been said before then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is broken and bruised, and it causes great pain, then you must heal it first. then cut the  angle of the spatula (bone) by cutting across from above,
and guard that the tail does not come up to the flesh which is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on it which soothes.
The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance is all flesh and by chance there is sometimes where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail.
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where birth is in no one's two. He who is born in no one's two does not move. and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance may move;
The waist of someone who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: waist it at its root with a wide spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint is grievous to cure; so hold you to cut.
In he who is born or must at the rear buttocks, it behoves that you cut first the fleshy rounding up to the bone, Then bind the bone to a suitable cloth for this, then treat it until it is healed.
The splints that come to two limbs together come by birth, or by joining of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you splint that joint so that the two parts return to their natural forms. Then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil, so that they do not adhere together; And you put between two pieces of subtle plank, as long as the bone is united, as it should be.
If the fusion comes to none of its two with the palm, so bind that suture as it should be.
Of evils
Are veins gross envelopes full of melancholic superfluities, which come into more members of the body;
and more often happens in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore it behooves you to administer to him once purging of the bowels, and then the cure of the basil.
The cure of iron is according to two ways: one is by cutting and drawing forth the black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw from it all out.
The waist is thus according to this manner: first raise the leg of hot water very strong, until the large vein be softened. then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, of a wide size,
then cleanse and draw forth the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much vein comes out as the virtue of the patient can endure;
And then bind it, and command him to bathe in black poultice of meats;
And resume the evacuation and purging when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The raising of the leg for the patient is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, then warm it at the fire, and then apply it to the vein where long from the hip to the knee, or in the part below the ankle;
then work the skin with the incisions, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when you feel it;
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin, it seems like a white rope;
then push the vein underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then place it on the incisions lightly,
then put it on one other place upwards of three finger widths; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, as you have done, and place it on another incision, as you did first;
then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift it, and place it on the two points of the foot;
then pull and lift it until the second cut; then extract it from cut to cut, until it is entirely drawn out, then place it in position;
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then put a needle with one very strong double thread into it and bind it and draw it out, and put it under one ray (or a piece of wood), and turn your hand back and forth, until it comes out and keep it from breaking, because if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out or lift it, and it brings pain to the patient
and when you have drawn it out completely, put on the wound place wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and dress it until it is healed
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said. If it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
If it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which one covers the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cover the vein;
and is of a large curve, because if it were fine, it would cover the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs nor trees are born, and in land that has no moisture;
and by chance it is born elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens because of rot that comes from under the skin
as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms,  growing between the skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then it changes colors, and the vein begins to swell, like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from 3 and a half to 2 inches, and the knot,
and leave the plank in place on the leg, and every time it hurts at the outside, wrap around the plank, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut a part of it, and envelop the remaining, and do not cover it at its root, until it is all out. for if you cut it, it goes back into the flesh, and brings abscess and rot there, and bad disease.
for that reason it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the flesh.
and sometimes this vein when it is treated of 5 palms long, or of 10, and a certain man came to me, to whom it had come out ten palms long, and when you cut it, it throws one ray or opening, and pierces it to the bottom
so that everything comes out; and make void the matter which is within, and administer to the place medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then cure it like abscesses.
And sometimes to this vein hands rain, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot. and much blood comes out from there, and from which rain flows; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms which are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land "ox disease", because it happens many times to oxen,
and is a small worm which is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down, and one feels it well at the alarm of limb to limb, as long as they break through the skin where it goes, and jump out.
and is endangered by rot of some humors, such as come towards serpents and worms and roundworms in the belly.
And one doubts its malice, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and milked, it is only possible to flee when it goes away:
So it is necessary therefore that you bind the place above and below with a strong linen tightly.
then cut above and the flesh there, and if the vein is caught in the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it does, is that it hurts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain beneath it the eyebrow, then cut above, and pull the matter out;
and it is necessary to use for the patient purification of the body with medicines dissolving for the corrupt humors,
and if worse from meat engendering rot.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This sickness is called "vakirir" in our land, and is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was summoned to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and just a little after, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, just like living silver when it is cut from its place.
the pain departs from that place and goes into the shoulder.
and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm;
then she told me that it returned again around her body, as I saw it.
I was very surprised how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I never had seen this illness in this manner. However, I had seen many who well had the pain move from one place to another. but I never had seen it like this, as I see it in the woman.
And I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were exposed, and for this reason appears that constraint windiness;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins swollen.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lump above and below evenly, and then cut on top until that constraint windiness at the place has left; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who bring up wind, such as fetid pills, and pills of serpentaria, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small, and haired, and soldered. and those that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and those that have pieces; and those that fall in any member fall according to two manners: or in the principal member falls,
such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it falls then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you after, appear to you: if it is necessary that you take care of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterward in many cases; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps up the  syfaec which is above the brain, it is when scotome and sore and twisting and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. and perhaps it happens without fever from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice. and leaps from the wound moisture white seeming to pus, and leaps also as if burnt flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold off from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not inside.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting. Then know without doubt that death is near.
And the sign of the seventh that does not move its stomach is that without plains of foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and gasps loudly and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs; and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighs; and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by adventure it jumps out of the wound something of the undigested flesh.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and jumps out a piece of fiber through the intestine gut, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes forth, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, like the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary [ribcage] and spine of the back and hips and legs, and similar members, are saved according to more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you, because of this that you do otherwise.
It happened to one man with an arrow in the root of the nose: I extracted it, and pulled from another side below the ear fat, and was healed without feeling anything.
And treat a wound where an arrow fell into the grease of the oil under the paper and the arrow was stuck, and one can only reach the tip towards the shaft. and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all i. of light iron without ears; the wound was healthy and he did not suffer any ill effects.
And treat an arrow from the throat to a christian, and it was an arabic arrow with ears:
I was the bristles, and I subtly until I betrayed her, and it was healed to the Christians.
And betrayed an arrow to one man, that it was in his chest or belly, and I thought he would die;
and then that he passed thirty days, so he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I removed it, and the betrayed force, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell on his back, and the wound was sewn up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural positions, nor finds any inconvenience in any of his natural works.
And see another man, whose arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and remain thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in the groin of a prince, the king, which was lodged within his loin. and was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded
I was called to treat him after it had been lodged for three days. So I found the wound very narrow.
I felt her with a whole subtle tent, and did not feel her at all. And she felt no prickling or pain beneath her right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on top of its place a cataplasm atractive and digestible, because the places did not swell. and appeared to me the wound of the arrow.
and appeared to me the wound of the arrow. I put the plaster on his hand for a few days, and closed the wound directly, and he stayed that way for a long time.
until he felt the arrow still in his flesh; and he told me. I put on the wound a medicine, acrid and corrosive, for several days, until it was open.
and feel for it, and sense the head of the arrow which is coming to its place. then adjust it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it penetrated well through the ends for four months.
and then I enlarged the wound so that I put my pliers into it, and mine from one side and the other, and it could not issue forth;
therefore do not cease to subtillize and to invent ways of instruments, until I took i. day as pliers well made, according to those that its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it and restored the wound.
And the wise judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sewn together, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows. so that you put your care on those that I do not say, because the books cannot take in everything;
but the wise masters compare by much little thing, and on those that are present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to the descent of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not lodged in the members where they are fixed except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which shoots beyond where it enters, is an arrow lodged in the flesh, and does not shoot out anymore.
And if it does not shoot now, let it remain until the flesh around is rotten and open;
And also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot move, leave it so for some days, and move it each day.
And then if it jumps back, and if it does not jump back, pierce around it to the whole i. forest subtle, until the skin around is widened, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is returned to its place in the body but cannot be seen, so then cover it with all the tent. And if you feel it, so treat it with no suitable instrument.
And if you cannot by the widening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein, so widen it as much as the wound is great; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears with which it holds
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears with which it holds if you remove the flesh that is enclosed in two parts at the wound as much as you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can extract it;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can extract it; and act carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather extract it more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then let him lay until his limbs are stiff, then treat it, for the extraction is painful. And if the bleeding opposes you, then administer what we have said about the cure in this chapter;
and guard yourself from cutting the nerve and vein, and try as best you can to extract the arrow without danger,
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him, for it is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one can see it or feel it apparently.
Cut then above, as long as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it; if it leaps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it for a while longer, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is there, remove the entire shaft.
And if the shaft has broken and you see administering plying is necessary, administer one instrument to help. so that the tip of the arrow goes into the head of the instrument; and then pull it out,
and if the arrow is embedded, put one instrument with a sharp point into it, to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is surrounded, you should cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can. then treat the wound as it is due.
And if the arrow falls in the buttock or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close, and you can cut into it, then cut;
and keep from cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary is. and cure it until it is healed.
The form of the pliers used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the form:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of veins of the common body Of veins from which one heals there are thirty-one, of which there is a head sixteen.
that is to say: two veins that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbesch"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins that are in the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called “augeherich”; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins that are commonly used are .v. in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the chest, and the common people call it "vein of the head"; And the middle one is called "bast," and is composed of the cephalic and the basilica, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the right side of the chest, and they call it "vein of the belly" by the common people, and is on the bone, and that from which one heals, which opens clearly on the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the vein between the ring finger and little finger, and it has two reins;
and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one is below the curve of the pouch on the left side; and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein which is called "nerve," which is in the ankle of the other leg
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears so helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the quality of the vein, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the vein, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck with a strap; until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head: who then to your back and where you feel the pulse below your back, so seize it;
then take the lancet, and thrust it beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein above, and cover and the skin and the vein well. two fingers' width to traverse, and make blood flow as you see fit;
then restrain and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cauterization in the first book.
The bleeding of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for an old headache, And suddenly, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of the sharp tears eyes;
And the qualities of the veins are so as I say: And that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins appear openly; and feel the pulse below the throat, and then look at its flow;
Then lightly place your hand on the vein toward your right index, and insert the lancet underneath. And gently raise the vein upward, and hold it, just as you did in two other veins, and draw out blood according to your need.
Then release the patient, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top;
and then form the bandage, and let it remain until it is healed; and we have spoken of their treatment and their extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for diseases of the face, and migraine, and redness.
and the quality of it is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "foser", whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and steady with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then bind the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed and never work with a wide flame.
However, it is not right that the flames be too much; and heal across, because the bone is near, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the beard, and the nose, and the corner of the eye, and the diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their healing is that the patient strains his neck by twisting from any linen, as before;
Then heal it, and let the wound be through the length of a flame, as wide as a little finger, for there is no flesh there.
And if the flame is too thin, it may break; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cloth, and bind it well.
The wound of the vein on the neck is good for fevers, and for sudden illnesses, and for diseases of the face. Such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old;
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then he draws his chin to his left hand and takes the subtle long flame, and places it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils for the vein does not open well yet, and the blood will now begin to flow;
and do not allow it to flow too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it at night because it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the two guindeges helps in the treatment of the alinne and the beginning of meselerie, and many diseases, and gouty arthritis, and corrosion, and herpes, and boils.
and the qualities of the blood are that the patient strains his neck from below one and the other, as we have said. and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one chair,
Then heal the vein with a long prick widely, then treat the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary.
Then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and restrain all the veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and let him leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of the healing of the livers The blood of the veins from above the lips helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks in lips, and sores and ulcers.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by those that are black, and by those that around them have small black veins: Therefore, one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt
Therefore, one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt if you cut the largest of each, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner
Of the vein beneath the tongue The vein beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the inflammation of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
And the qualities of the veins are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks below on each side a black vein.
Therefore, prick both of them, and do not pierce too deeply, for underneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm that are commonly bled from are bled in two ways:
or they prick them at one flame about an inch wide, or with a subtle olive knife as you cut trenches, and it is called "aneasil"; and are wide and subtle according to the wideness and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the fire cautery is well-known, and is as wide as you see:
And it is needed for opening the veins that are full of thick blood that is visible, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive cautery:
and is more subtly pointed, and is used to drain fine veins where there is fine citrine blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps those diseases that are below the throat, and neck, and chest, and belly.
and it is necessary for the bloodlettor that he bloodlets wisely, and that he be wary of the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it behooves him to stanch it, as I have said. and it must not be pricking the flame, but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you should restrain it, and change another; or you want no vein from it, or you cut in its place the vein in the arm; it opens manifestly. and apply the flame like a knife, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the vein, then thus it behoves that you draw out the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse. Then sign the place with ink, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein with the sharp knife.
And guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, for it is from the artery; therefore, avoid it.
And if you see it bulge upward also like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery: Hurry then, and put your hip on length, then take your hip off if it is without a restraint, which happens many times.
Bind his arm, and leave it so, and do not move it the patient; and be on guard, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if it is not restrained, and he moves it, and the medicine is not present, then stop the artery if it opens, for it is the head of the retraction; and restrain the vein.
And take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one half and tie it well up to the other day;
If the wound is clean, it is good; if not, treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping of bleeding is not harmful in many positions for the small size of the wound, and the powerlessness of the arm's joint.
The vein in the middle, if it is aided, helps to treat blood from above and below the body. Because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said.
and it is necessary for the healer that he search for the nerve which is below, and if they are pointed too much, and he finds the nerve, and he inflames it and the saints are grieved, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men because of its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument of anesthesia; and avoid the nerve to your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision long.
The vein of the head helps so much, it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes.
and it is necessary to bleed by pricking it in the olive flame or the myrtle flame, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not have a nerve nor artery.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and it matters nothing if one fails the first time, and one begins again. And by chance it swells the veins in some people, even if one fails the first time, but it does not matter. The qualities of blood are according to your thought.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that it is administered only to preserve health.
and to ward off diseases to come; and it should be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one should bleed at the beginning of prayers in spring and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one should bleed the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
The bleeding that is administered to diseases has no determined hour, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and at all times;
and it does not behoove to bleed children up to fourteen years, nor a woman carrying from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed those who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they purge the bowels with a light clyster. if he has much phlegm held back, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous and harmful humors from the principal members;
Do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are feverish, nor those who are dropsy;
and if one becomes ill after colic pain, and vomiting, and bellyache, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, and wakefulness and fasting, and that which is all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body.
then subtly reduce the humors, if one is fat, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power.
Then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents him, to subtly thin the blood.
and open the vein of the thigh as we have said.
and keep yourself free from labor, and from sin, and from lust, and similar things.
and be bound and joyful, and let the healthier arm be higher than that which is being treated, and rub the arm two or three times.
then draw the bandage upward moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct it;
and then rub the area with your hands, until the veins swell up and they can be felt.
Then moisten the skin with a drop of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand upon that vein below its place a bit where he wants to bleed, that the vein be not seen and feel for piercing. For there are veins that appear as thick as cords when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness. so that when one puts the flame upon it, it retracts from the flame and cannot open the vein, and this is how these are.
and if he has to open a vein, it is too narrow, for this reason the surgeons must be warned in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, he begins again a little below where it was cut or above, if the lesion is not inflamed.
And if the lesion is inflamed and the patient fears it, let him leave it for one or two days, and do not bind his arm. For by chance, boils may come; nor does he enter a bath, then begin the bloodletting again if he pleases;
and if the opening is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it is not as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening directly into the whole flame;
and make the work a little while, so that the eyes are swollen; for this happens often when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, then do not begin the bleeding again, and put on a little bit of oil ointment, because it calms the body's blood flow, and is better in this place than the oil itself;
and thus administer the oil ointment in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
and the same thing happens to the thigh and shin, when it is put in place; so subtle is the sinew and it separates when it is too thick.
And if there comes an abscess, which happens often, even when it is only drained once when the opening of the vein is small. if you hurry, and put on top a sponge soaked in water and some hot oil, and hold it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has left the vein, and if it remains in place for some days afterward with no blackness or greening, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put on no thing of aloes or frankincense remixed in juice of calamint, monstratre, or seeming.
And many times abscesses and appearance at the saline of the basilica: put therefore your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance bad. Therefore I warn you that you do not put on any thing of what we have said, because by chance it is short without the artery; but make i. plaster dry to harden the place, then cure it with another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each one according to the quantity of his virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it be discharged until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it be left until it is thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it behooves him who is pale and weak, and needs bloodletting, to make a wider wound, and let the flames be wide.
And for him who is feeble, do the opposite, and it behooves him to bleed little and often, and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from a decrease in blood and a severance of nerves, and it is better than bleeding from the long or wide vein.
And to him whose body is lacking in blood, it is necessary to give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if it is roasted, treat with blood three times or four.
And if he is of cold complexion, give him moistened bread before the bloodletting in syrup of figs, or in a syrup of honey aromatic with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-smelling syrup.
And if he faints at the bloodletting, after the exit of some blood, it is necessary that he inhale broth of meat and a subtle fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the opening of veins.
And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed other times, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little bit at a time, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And who wants to empty his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to bleed from another place, then he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood in his body that is already heated and brings fever, so it is necessary to draw a great quantity, and widen the opening until it flows in streams. since you heal all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his arm when it is healthy, so that death does not come in place of pameson and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it is not fitting when you see the arm loosened, and make blood issue the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press upon it forcefully; but if it is curved, let him extend his arm as much as possible, because otherwise, this would be harmful;
but let it stay until it heals the second time; or you point it at the tip of the flame, as long as the vein which is frozen has been opened. and put on .i. piece of wool moistened in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not bind it at all, until the abscess is appeased.
And if necessity requires bloodletting a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in place of the vein in the neck because it is composed.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient plunges his hand into hot water until the bone is red.
Then he is bound firmly so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, neither wide nor long;
And let the opening be wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if he cannot draw it out, put the hand back into hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand into hot water, because it is put in more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, because there is no artery or nerve.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is worth to all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
hold the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if it can be seen; and if it is broken crookedly, and if you cut it straight through all of it, then it will not cause harm;
and do not dig too deep into them, for the nerves are under all the flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water, if it feels numb in the wound, and cannot be moved.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on top of the vein to help it heal quickly, and do this for each one.
The vein of him in the left hand is worth to the disease of the mouse, and do all as I have said towards the right.
The vein of the saphenous is worth to all the diseases that are below the body, as diseases of the legs, and retention of flowers, and disease of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of its vein are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it perspires, and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
so then choose the larger vein, or at the ankle, that you think is best.
And if you are bleeding on the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and bleed by traversing as when cutting; and let the flames be anethetized.
And if he cannot withstand it, then put the foot back in the water, and let the vein bleed well.
And if the needle is required the first time, it starts again the second at the top a little bit, because the point is salty. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus do of the sphacelus of the other foot equally.
The point of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its opening is good for the pain of the hip, when it is for hot blood.
And the qualities of its opening are that the patient sits where there is a bath, and pulls upwards on the ankle four fingers in twisting.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then cleanse it in all ways that you can, and by crossing and it is better that you cut it, for the vein is dry, and it is very well supplied with blood to man's hands.
and it is better that you cut it, for the vein is dry, and it is very well supplied with blood to man's hands. And if you do not find it, then cleanse any vein that opens or below the heel, and towards the small toe, and guard the nerves;
and make as much blood flow as you see, and then untie the band, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed.
Of the sucking cups
Sucking cups are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this suction which is without pricking is done in two ways: either with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the windpipe below the chin; and the windpipe at the two shoulders; and the windpipe above the hips; and the windpipes immersed in the two arms; and the windpipes below the two legs; and the cupping glasses on the two ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and for this reason do not weaken it as we do with bleeding from a vein; and it is not fitting for it to be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any illness that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is necessary to use cupping, or out of habit, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in every time;
for there are such who, when they have need of breathing, have a heavy head;
and there are some who have fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness around their eyes;
and some who have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and bleed. and there are some who dream, and see through blood and sores and corpses and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed in the month, we command them to wind after three hours of the day.
The bloodletting of the vein helps with the pain in the head… that comes to the eyes, and it is not fitting for this to be done after the evacuation of all the body.
and this cupping is in place of bloodletting of the cephalic vein
and it is not fitting for those who are of a cold constitution to use it, or who have chills, because it does them great harm.
And for this reason it is not fitting that the elderly use it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases.
And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower down due to the doubt of oblivion.
The suctioning of the neck is in the place of the vein of the head and of the basilica, and for this reason it is worth for the treatment of the pain. and to the opening of the channel of the  pomon (perhaps referring to an artery), and to all, and to repletion;
and then it is necessary to gently push, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause obstruction in the stomach and heart.
The ventilation of the two ribs of the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the patient to express his hand when putting it on, so that he does not cut the artery and there is no bleeding.
The ventilation below the chin is good for mouth diseases, and for gum rot, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and congestion.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins of the arm. because it draws blood from those large veins;
and instruct the patient not to thrust too far in, for the skin is bare and lies over nerves and arteries.
The leech which is on the rump is good against hemorrhoids from the foundation, and against diseases of the anus, and it should be that the leech is large, and is of iron, so that she has need to draw well; and perhaps, if it were subtle, it would break; and there it makes great wounds.
The leeches of the legs are good openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good against old pains in the hips, and the knees, and the bladder, and soften the flowers; and they are in their place on the two shins, and the two ankles, and all way they weaken the body after long use, and bring weariness in more dispositions.
The manner of putting the leech is that you put it first empty, and succeeds temperately, and put it gently, and move equally, and do not cease to do so, until you see the place red and swollen, and appear the flow of blood; then hold firm, and put back the leeches, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are some who have thick flesh, and clear veins: it should be struck once only, and it should be done with large cuts, and a deep incision; and suck gently.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to gently open the way of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw blood drop by drop, we only strike once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we start again often; and if the vein is thick, we strike in the middle, and the end is that the vein be pierced strongly,
and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin and whose pores are closed, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with oil perfumed and dissolving: If it is in this state, of violet oil, or almond oil sweet, or oil of pumpkin seed;
And if it is in summer, of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or dill oil, and similar ones.
And if the one being treated has tender flesh and large pores, then it is not necessary to put any oil there;
but it is necessary to wash after the aeration of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or china water, or a similar one.
And he who has much moisture, let him rise from it with ease, or myrtle water, and sumaq, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from it with old wine, or  juice of rue, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things;
and they should not be bled with a cupping glass before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
And it is necessary that he be warmed when he ought to be aired and when he is aired. And beware of him who is getting well is choleric, and if his skin is too hot and inflamed; if it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the armpit, and similar things;
and bruised pears, and meat of chestnut, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, takes syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mince poppy, and mince almonds and small onions and pigeons.
And on the day that he will drink it, he must drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give no one at any time triacle or musk before the cupping or after, to comfort the main limbs; And make it subtle the drink, but it is not fitting that those who are hot should drink it.
The suction cups that are applied without causing injury are those that are placed on the liver, and on the stomach, and gout, and on the belly and the buttocks and the hips and the groin, because these members do not suffer well to be injured on their parts.
and one does it only for to attract blood from limb to limb, as we place them on the breasts when the child suckles; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and buttocks to lessen the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one puts it upon the liver and the mouse when there is wind retention.
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and at times they are administered together with fire, and at other times filled with tepid water,
as in diseases of the pleura, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable for this have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And have two fingers wide and half a palm in breadth, and have or cost at the middle one small hole, as for putting a needle
and let it be of iron, smooth in front so that it does not sting the patient when put on the limb;
and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a burning candle
and be both large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
For the children’s cupping glasses are different from adults’, and the thin ones from the fat ones.
And must one put this cupping glass thus upon the limb:
Take a wick of wax or one of linen, and place it inside the cupping glass at the end of the stem that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame be at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it upon the limb, and these ought to be upon the opening that we have said, so that when one wants, there goes vapor, and one removes the suction.
and take up the linen as before, and recommence it often, if you have need.
In the suction which is administered in illness of pleurisy, to all acute [cases], it has no handle nor opening, and is not administered unless when it is full of liquid, and is put upon the limb solely.
and this is the form:
Bloodying are administered only in members where one cannot put suction cups for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and in their denuded of flesh, such as two or nines, and other similar ones;
and the qualities of the user are that when you find bloodying that are in clear sweet waters without purulence, take them;
and put them in a nut in fresh water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then be healed of vein and leech, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they will be full, and fall, if it is their place where one can put a leech, then put it, because it is worth much after.
If not those, then lift the place of that with ease, and then with water, very well, and then strain it.
and if the ones heal too much after the poultices of the body, then moisten i. drape of linen in cold water and put it on, until the poultice is stretched.
and if the wounds are multiplied, put on top of them ground vitriol, or saltpeter, and similar things, until it is stretched out;
or you put on top the place half of peeled beans, and let them until they dry up in the place, so it will now stop.
and if you need more, then take other bandages.
And if the bandages will not be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you insert a needle into it until the bandages come out. and then put them on top, and as soon as they feel the blood, they become hot.
and when you see that they are bleeding, powder on a bit of aloes and wool crushed, or ash, they will now stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is about the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Know this, dear friend, that the fools who gaze upon this chapter, they have never seen any of the old books, nor have they read a letter from them.
And because of this reason, science is lost in our land, for I have never found any good one;
and I know nothing else, except through the science of old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
and I have shown you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments which are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summary of the words and chapters where the wise puts his understanding, and stays on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you haste to heal the sick on one side and the other, if nothing hinders them, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age;
or if the limbs are not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold meats, and meat of goose and kid, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, as long as you have doubt of a hot abscess, or spreading of matter in the limb; so that the sick person returns to his first governance that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to mend, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and barley, and testae, and peas, and guts of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment they regain muscles and the fracture heals faster.
And know that bones broken in the elderly and decrepit people do not mend well nor join together according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, the large tendons that are torn and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not let any part of its work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures. For there are fractures that go inward, and others that stick out, like the point of a feather for writing.
For there are fractures that go inward, and others that stick out, like the point of a feather for writing. And if with a fracture, and a fracture to a whole small crack.
And for each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes to it.
And is known the fracture of the bone by those whose parts are twisted, and open well by outside, and it feels to the pressure of the hand.
And when there is no torsion or feeling on touch, and the patient feels no great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can well have twisting, or split, or small fracture. If it does not behoove you to move it by hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then constrain it now subtly.
And know that the fracture that goes in an arch, and are the two parts disjointed, it behoove to put them now equally in place, so that as abscesses they come;
and if abscesses do come there, then let him leave it none day, until the abscesses are appeased. Then place it equally in the joint as you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of one where there are pieces; then restrain, as it befits later on.
And if the bone is broken into pieces, two parts, whether it be hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you gently rejoin all the pieces in their places as well as you can, and make sure that through your work, no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the set well and do not constrain too much, nor press as those who do come through their work abscess hot and contraction to the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the member is in place, so chastise well the patient that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and guard well that the member be so assured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it behoves to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it behoves to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and guard that it be placed straightly, that tortuosity does not come when it is restored
And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is fitting to wrap them in linen cloth soft and fine;
and those that are large, such as the hip and leg: it is necessary to encircle them with a wide and firm band, because the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and restrain it from all sides equally, so that there is no gap.
Then tie lighter bandages on top, three or four tours according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all the bandaging, then go above the fracture and restrain it less than the fracture, so that the fracture is moved a little.
and soften the bandaging a little bit at a time, until you reach most of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and wrap it again directly above the fractured area;
Then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first place above.
Then put between the bandages of linen or cloths, until it is all equal, then bind everything above i.e., with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, put something soothing on top of the abscess that calms it and removes the swelling, and leave it like this for some days.
Then  strain over your dressings, and let them be half the width of a good quality cane, carefully cut, or from wood used for clubs, or from palm branches, and let them be according to this shape:
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others
and also as long as is necessary for the limb of small or large size;
then restrain on the splints just as you did in the first hour, then tie above with a thread evenly, just as in the first hour on the fracture;
tighter is below, and less above; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I want from works of fools who make their stitches with cords of linen twisted, and that is a great error, for the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it is not fitting that it have between each star less than two fingers' width.
And if the patient is irritated by the threads of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy places, then place under them compresses of linen, or wool padding, so that it does not become raw.
When the wound is with a bruise, and the bone is broken, I will say its cure after this.
And know that it is not fitting to bind all broken limbs the first day. For when the limb is great, it is not fitting to put splints on it before after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of abscesses coming hot;
and see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that stays at the walls of the mill, and confit it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in many situations, and even to women and little children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three ounces of  bardane root, laudanum, elecampane, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mugwort, each one ounce; myrrh and aloes, each half an ounce; alechil (probably a typo for "ale") eight drachms; and make it into powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is good for many men.
Another manner of plaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana .x. grains; myrrh and aloes, ana .viiij. grains; acacia vi. grains; Armenian bollic .x. grains, and grind well, and confection with water or yolk of an egg, and administer it.
Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and soothes the pain that arises, and the use of the bone, and the sprain: take new wool, and moisten it in ash and oil cooked, and put on top of the place. This plaster does not restore [the joint], but it is good to soothe a hot abscess, and properly removes the pains.
Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and terrestrial balm leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of ointment for the restoration of broken bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of quince, one part each; and grind it, and mix with wine, and if the limb is scalded, mix with moist coriander water, or water, and use it.
Another manner of ointment more potent than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and flax seeds, bugleweed, melilot, and  rue, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all one part each; and grind it, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Galen says in his book that one should put on the broken limb to restore it a cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, such as we have said.
Another manner of poultice that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and chaff of sheep's wool, or feathers of an owl, and visamalve, and silk equally, and grind them, and make a poultice and lay it.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest, or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take light cloth, and a sponge of sea moisture, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. Then let the limb rest an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it with a nut, until you are sure of the hot abscess.
And rest the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain be removed, then begin the fine binding again, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and subtlety until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need plaster and linen, then begin it again, as you did at first equally.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, then do not unbind it before 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. And never leave it unbound for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals and approaches the setting of the bone;
Therefore he restrains it more than before, and fattened its flesh as I have said before; and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that no nourishment can come from there; Therefore apply hot water, every time you untie it, and cleanse a little the wound;
Therefore by this work, the nourishment is drawn to the limb, and it quickly mends what fools do who bring the limb back into a bad position: This is bad, and such works are dangerous, and I see nothing else but to let it be and work it straight.
Of various kinds of fractures Many ways of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made by the thrust of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone until the place which is below the bone, as if it were hewn or cut; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichure."
When the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolue"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an impacted percussion, or a fissure or of the hip bone, or of the head on the bone, or similar things.
And if there is a fracture piercing, which approaches to the skin that is under the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound which is set in the bone as subtle as a hair, and it is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called 'capillary';
and if the wound which is made either by striking of stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes enter the piece of bone down, and it is the head like that what the blacksmiths do when they forge on the boilers; so enters the stone inside.
And this happens more to those who have or chiefs moistened bones, such as the head of a child;
and there are all these manners of fracture that tiny pieces are separated from them like stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all manner of fractures by the retraction on them, and the inquiry to tendons, and by the corrupt cartilage that is on it.
The seeming capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs on it, then the fracture appears black.
In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever, and eyes becoming watery and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an untreatable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the fracture comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the cloth under the bone does not rot, and the accident comes that we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes to the cloth that covers the brain, then it is necessary that you split the fractured part thus: and it is that you prick the head of the wounded person, and uncover above the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more deeply than you can.
And if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess is poulticed, then help them as it is fitting, and that you fill the place with soft cloths soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest until the poultice is calmed and bleeding ceases; then begin to prepare for removing the bone, and this is done in two ways of work: one way is that you cut a narrow strip before, and this is its form:
And then put another incision larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of incisions of different widths, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of iron, and in work lightly, so that you do not break the head.
And if the bone is hard and thick, it is necessary that you pierce it inward, so that you administer blows with mallets, but do not hit them too hard lest they pierce beyond the bone's sheath, and it must have above its point a margin or circle, which does not let the point pass beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, so that each one comes to its place in the width of the bone, so that you have mallets for all tests; and this is the shape of the three kinds of mallets:
The qualities for piercing inward the broken bone is that you put one mallet on the bone, and turn at your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the mallet elsewhere a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as pliers; and guard that you do not touch the marrow nor the sheath.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you remove the debris which is separated from the bone to every other instrument resembling a scalpel, but it is necessary that it be more slender and more subtle than the other scalpel;
And if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then gently with instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments as we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and it is very strong, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered that portion, you will place below the head of this lens-shaped incision tool, of which this is the form:
And do not cut from one side, and it is the part sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently chop the bone all around, and take good care of the cloth that is below.
If it is stuck to the bone, gently remove it because it is well removed without pain, and without fear.
And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to apply that astringent, and remove the scales with a sharp razor which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If there are before great razors, and after more subtle ones, and do not cease to do so until it is well.
In each of the other capillary and subtle cuts, it is necessary that you administer cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not replied to by him who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take i. drapery of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; Then take i. other drapery doubled in ii. or in iii., and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first drapery; and do this more gently than you can, that you do not injure the wound, then administer by above i. other linen, and do not constrain it more than until it holds the wound only;
and leave it thus for i. day or ii., until the abscess is appeased, then undo it, and administer medicines as such as roots of lilies, and flour of vervain, and powder of frankincense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and administer other medicines mild without mordication;
And guard that the wound be well clean, that you leave not there any ointment, nor leave there any join to gather, because when a join gathers upon the brain cloth, it becomes corrupt and sore, and brings to the patient great harm; because when one puts upon it a thing biting like this, it stings from above.
Take guard therefore, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
And if the blackening does not come from outside but only because of the medicine that has been put upon it, which possesses virtue, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drape, and put it upon the wound. then the cure of manners of cures as it is fitting, until he be cured.
Know that no times are broken the two parts of the hip joint, or one by the sole, because they are two bones; and that below is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it be forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your little finger or pointed at the hip joint, and set each fracture inside with your index finger, and with the palm outwards, until the hip returns according to its natural form; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain by your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a straight stick a little thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, make another splint, and hurry to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the swelling has subsided, then band at the head of the knee with ten lengths of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bandage one on each side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
And they say any restorer one must wet the tents in butter and change them each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened with a preparation of egg white and powdered millet; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes they put goose feathers in their place and if one is too soft, wrap it with cloth and hold the break (fracture) and breathe on the patient; but do as you wish.
And if an abscess comes to the new wound while you are working on it, put a piece of linen or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in one pinch of diachylon.
And if an abscess does not come, apply a plaster from the outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, congealed with egg yolk, then place light compresses on top, and bind it neither tightly nor loosely.
And if the fracture of the bone is small and it is broken into many pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then suture the fissure, and treat it with things that bring flesh, and join it, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
And if it has no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put on many splints until it is healed.
of the rupture of the jaw
When the jaw is broken below, and there is no external wound, and the fracture is external only, and is not broken in two, except that it is splintered inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your left index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, put your right index finger, and push the fracture inwards lightly, and hold it with the other hand outwards, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a fracture, then restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw cerote, and place on top i drapel double; and place on top of the cloth a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then re-set what is changed; and put a plaster on top, of the powder from the mill with abundance of egg or flaxseed flour, after what you have removed the cerote; and put on top of the plaster light linen, and if the plasters dry out, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess arises, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward oneself that no piece of the bone is removed; so subtly to remove with instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, then close the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable for this, to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks more than once in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to .iij. manners: or it is broken and severed in .ij., and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is when the fracture is without a wound, that you have .ij. ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other stretches his neck towards the part; then put equal the fracture to your two hands, so that the form is as it ought, and there is no appearance nor unevenness.
And if you need to extend more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be big according to your need; and being and light the bone, and strain the sphere to your hand, so that you put equal the fracture, as it ought.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder by force because it comes from being in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie often upon his back, and put under the shoulder one or two pillows medium, and push the ministers' shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
And then address the fracture to your two hands, and if you find it fragmented, then it is necessary that you split it up. And treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any pressure, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to ward off the syfac.
And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all hollowed out, and be also wide as it is fitting, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work. And have two handles, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrower, as is the route of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
And when you are sure of the heat abscess, if you cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt the heat abscess, then apply the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and put it on top.
The strapping of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a plaster of ground flour and beaten egg white, and put light poultices on top, and put a spindle under the seat, if you need it. Then take a very wide bandage of one palm wide, then put one double cloth on top of the poultices and plaster; then take a subtle strap three finger widths long and wide, and wrap it around the bandaged area, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage on the neck, and lower the healthy shoulder, and lower the broken shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward them every day, and when the ligaments loosen, then restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps i. small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the head higher; so it will lighten the fracture of the collarbone by the relief of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless a bad accident happens, until xx days;
then begin the plaster again, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in at most xxviii days, and in fewer for some men.
of the fracture of the shoulder
There happens that the shoulder breaks or wide place it does not fill in the middle and is known only by touch; then, arrange according to the figure of the fracture and set it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with an abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on one double drape; then put on a wide and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is touching at any place of the shoulder, so use those hairs of lin bandage, so that the splint lies evenly; then hold it with all a great bandage firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the link each day; and every time that it softens, so hold it, and put back equally the splint if it is out of its place, and lie the patient on their side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 days or 25, And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that puts itself out easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes beforehand and not under the skin, then make it up, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to appease the hot abscess.
of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it bends toward the toes, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of feeling, and numbness, and perhaps vomits blood, and the bones are felt through the skin around the broken bone, and it hurts very much.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and one cushion is put between the shoulder blades, then the shoulders are pressed together, and the sides of the two bones are brought together with the hands, and carefully put in all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then bandages and compresses are placed over the thin layer of salt, or other light bandage, and it is wrapped in one cloth, and tied above the broken bone, so that it does not move; and the bandage is turned around to the back, and bound tightly, and each hour the bandage is checked, and if it loosens, it is tightened; and if it needs to be untied for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, and clean what has come from the wounds in ways of treatment; then reapply the bandages, and tighten them until it is healed.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs comes only in their thickness after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for that reason because they are glazed; and one feels it well upon the inquiry as the two.
And the restoration is that you put each break equal, as it befits. And then put the plaster, and restrain with a splint, if you have need.
And if the breaking of ribs is leaning inwards, the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and besides piercing, there are coughs, and all sorts of vomiting of blood, and this is a serious illness, and the ancients put great effort into it.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the pleurisy outward.
We do not do this, except that warm abscesses come, if they have not already come. And if it has come, then treat it.
And some of us say that one should place suction cups on the spot in order to draw out (the fluids) strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup draws out superfluous fluids to the area due to weakness.
And they said some of you should cover the place with wool cloth in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the skin even around, then be cured with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone which points the cloth, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to split above the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put under one instrument to guard the syfac; and afterwards must one dig the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put on wet cloths in rose oil, and put on the place; and cure while the place of this which it should be an abscess, and lie so still on the ribs where it should, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes there is a fracture to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, if you take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in more positions, and if he moves them and feels well when they are extracted and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care on him.
And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in hands, and on his back there is windiness and expulsion without will; and when he is laid upon his belly, there is expulsion without will. And when he is laid upon his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then it is the lighter thing.
And the cure is that you warm it if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or olive oil of an egg, until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is healed. And if any bones are broken, it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two sides of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure it with ointment promoting flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow," then put your pouch on your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand in your power, then put the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are broken bones, do so again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bone of the hip
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is not always a little diminution at the head; and doing long, and declines to the sides, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and prickling, and swelling where it breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand on it, as long as you are on the fracture; and know what is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the head only, so put equal the fracture, as long as it is to natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, so make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you. And when you have put it even, place it on the splint, then place a stick or piece of wood on top, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and apply the splint under the ribs, until the joint is even.
And command the patient to sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes to the wound, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and place what we have said before on it; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is proper, if there are no bad accidents; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of two ways: one of which is that you take one staff straight of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two heads two ligatures, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on one seat; then lay the broken arm onto the staff, until it reaches the armpit, and make a curve of staff in the middle, then put any heavy thing or the ministers extend it downwards; then put the pieces together, carefully,  until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties the hand to his neck, then command two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below up to the whole length, and stretches each one to its side.
And if you see that the extraction is more far, then restrain, that is, the linen under the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one linen medium under the seat, and another towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary to put one linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the top, and on the outside; then set the fracture equally, as it is necessary, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess arises, then do not restrain it until seven days, and put on linen moistened in oil rose, as long as the abscess subsides; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm upon the shoulder, and put your hand upon the shoulder or upon the breast; and put the drape, and restrain upon the shoulder, and upon the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if nothing prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and put on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint one pair of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three pairs from each side; then restrain upon the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter upon the fracture, stronger and less in length.
And if you see the position of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the boil, so let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the bandage, that itching nor swelling does not come to the place, or the inflammation may not come to the limb for that it is too inflamed. If the above.
And if none such accidents come, so do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool equally, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the ligatures are softened; so if above by virtue of medicine, and give him the meat that we have before set, in such manner that the meat is at first thin; and when it begins to recover, let it be thick. And it is custom that the shoulder and leg ought to be taken again in forty days of all; and then one must unbind and administer bath and medicines for healing the place. And if the constriction is bad and obstructed, so delay unbinding one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fossil," because one is small, and that is the one that follows the pouch; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the little joint; perchance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small one, and perchance both together.
When the small bone is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are both broken together. If it is the small bone that is broken alone, it is necessary to gently extend it, and set it straight.
And if it is the large bone, it is necessary to pull harder; and put it on one cushion, and hold the hand higher than the other hands, and the little joints lower than the other joints, and let the patient cross on him self, and one cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the below part of his hand, or at one lien, and other ministers to one other above. And then put the mirrors straight, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint on the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take the treatment.
And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, then glue a cloth made of cerate mixed with rose oil and white wax, so that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind the cloth carefully over them until the abscesses are appeased. Then remove the cerate and place a poultice of ground flour with an abundance of egg on top, then put splints, and let the splint covering the fracture be slightly larger and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or braces in more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and keep it tighter over the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less distant, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are on top of the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard or rough; and let the thread, with which they are bound, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the bandage after a few days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb in hot water, until the itching is appeased; and let the limb not be allowed to rest at all. And then begin the tightening again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if you take care that the numbness cannot come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave thus for some days, until the numbness goes away, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, do not unwrap him until twenty days, or until it is felt that he can put his hands on his neck, and be even-necked, and take care of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and near us there are few fractures, and it comes only with many times a sprain.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behooves the patient to sit crossed and straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on the board stretched out, and stretch his ministers the broken bones, and put them equal to their places, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one sheet of linen.
And if the fracture is at the bottom towards the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to squeeze it to his broken palm; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of hard wood as big as the palm of the hand, and bind it as it behoves.
And if the fracture is to the outside, it is necessary that you put a splint on top and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and staunch the ligature between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the two, then it is a splint, put it straight, as it should; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit, put a small straight splint to raise the fracture and not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index or one of the others, put it straight, and tie it with the sound finger that is after; or tie them all together in .i. holding, which is better, or put on a splint above, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of the hot and dry abscess, and succor what comes to it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is done in two ways, one above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his limb to his side equally; and this is when the fracture is in between the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one limb goes towards the groin and the other limb below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, then one limb is towards the knee and the other extension downward; then put the pieces of bone equal with your two hands, until it is according to its natural shape, and then put on the splint, and bandage, if an abscess does not appear there.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down then return to your work and your care; the bandage is made in this manner. It is necessary that you encircle the fracture, i.e., bandage hard doubled in two or three, and keep there the superfluities, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and put one long thread between the hip and the leg, near the knee below, and let the head of the thread go up; then turn up on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the place eight between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put equal pressure, then begin to tie firmly three or four above the fracture; and as much as you go higher above the fracture, and less tight; then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the hip and the leg, and tie three splints that are above, then return down to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes no abscess or swelling nor any other sign.
And if it happens, untie it, and dress what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it is necessary to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to cut the place, and draw out the pus; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
And never once is the hip broken like this, when one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder or arm; however, with this restoration done, it does not cause pain to the patient at all.
And knows that the broken bone is restored in one day or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the joint of the knee
Knows that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure or one opening, and there is to all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels well.
And the restoration is when it is put equal what is round to its ends, as long as it is assembled moved it can; then put the splint, and put a round piece there if you need it, and restrain it as it ought, then return all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, like hot poultices and similar things; so put at each accident what he needs, until it be sound.
of the breaking of the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and there comes all to every breaking as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is as that of the arm equally, and the works are all i.
And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns in every direction.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is seen well; and it turns downwards. Then administer extension, and put it straight, and tie the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are more pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of woven wool that cover the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down; then wrap in two layers one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle also, and at this juncture the leg will not be able to decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and no one administers one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly done this is in a fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; and treat until it is healthy.
Of the fracture of the bones of the foot
To the ankle there comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot it comes many times a fracture and to the two points, and there has been nothing else but in more dispositions.
And if there comes fracture to the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return into their places; then place the splint and bandages on top, and under the sole of the foot a small board to 2 hands wide, then restrain the foot tightly, and then after you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things which you need.
And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones aligned, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one poke more wide, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in .i. linen cloth, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it stand on the top of the table away from the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and correct each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the finger bone
When the bone of a woman's pelvis is broken, she must be seated with her hips enlarged, then inclined to the back part, and held there at the rear; then fill the vagina with cotton, and put in it as much as one stone; then lay the woman down, and gently raise her back up and down, and then jump on the cotton until it comes to the entrance of the vagina, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back in, and do this for seven days or so; thus will the fracture be restored. If you see that, take a bladder from a ram, and tie a string to its opening, and put the whole bladder into the vagina; then blow into the string until the bladder is inflated inside: the vagina will return the bone to place; then fill it with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healthy.
And when the bone of the arm of a man or a woman is broken, it is restored as we have said about the hipbone; and these fractures near to those who put their study and use into them, and read my book, are not concealed at all: for the fracture signifies in more than one disposition the right way of restoration: therefore understand.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's neck and put it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to him.
And if the wound heals, then retain the vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if a pus-filled sore does not come.
And if a pus-filled sore comes, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about evil accidents.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered heart, so it is necessary that you put it slightly into place with your hands, to small extent.
And if the extension is not prepared for you to put it equal with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. or .viij. long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary for the smith that he forge .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of fracture; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and be thicker in front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called 'palainche', for which reason it is necessary that the curved head be placed on top of the apparent bone; and hold it once, so that it rejoins, and be equal one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has possession.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incisor or saw, to your power; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as possible to keep it in its place, then moisten one drape with black styptic wine, and properly cover the wound; and put nothing on the wound, such as cerote or anything else where there is oil, so that it does not bring about rot and corruption; then administer poultices when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut away the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and warn yourself well that the wound should not be strained with the fracture; and many times fools have done this, and have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time; and let the tightening be softer and more gentle than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident might come from it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then you should not put poultices on it; but instead surround it, in place of poultices, with hard cloths, and tie them. And when after one or two days you see swelling coming to the wound, then remove what you have put on it entirely with wine, and put a healing ointment on it, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you untie the member two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it be joined and healed.
And it is necessary that the limb be pulled apart in such a manner that the bone goes down easily.
And if the next day, and it cannot be joined but returns to the way it was before, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all those loose pieces which cause the pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place, or some other manner of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he says in his chapter before. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not try to set them, because many times death comes from it. But leave it until it mends itself; perhaps after 20 or 30 days it will fall back into place, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
Of bruises that come from the wound
We come many times after the health of the bruise, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot do the limbs their natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if it administers astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocol, acaice, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with an egg white or with a basil; and put them on the wound in poultices, and hold it well, and do not untie it in hands during; and then untie it, and start another one, until the knots are removed; or you hold it on a piece of well-made plank; for the properties of the plank are that it removes all the inflammations from the limbs; and if the knot is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so cut above it, and make the superfluity appear; or you reattach it to any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healed.
When the broken bone is set, and afterward the limbs remain weak and feeble, it happens for many reasons: one of which is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and it could not come to nourish the limb; or because of too much inflammation; or because of too great movements, not in their time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is feeble.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and ease; then put poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws to the great nourishment, and the inflammation often goes away with hot water, until the nourishment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
The member twisted after the setting
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great evils come, and perhaps death; nonetheless, if the swellings and the torments are fresh, then it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of mallow, and roots, and honey, and similar things; and make .i.  a softening plaster, such as aqua diylon well made, and you take the mallow root, and you cook it with lard or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take fig fat, and grind it with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
And at no time is the swelling removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. And be it given movement to the limb each hour.
And if the twisting is entrenched and hardened, as a stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put care and study in the healing.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation comes from a joint out of its place, because it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation happens to anyone, it now conviene to bring it back without using splints.
Because if one delays, it swells the limbs, and by chance if one puts it back in its place with pain; for this reason it does not conviene that one moves it at the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings pain and other aches;
However, when this happens, if you have bled the patient, then let him, until the abscesses are calmed; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it gently, and cure each limb as they come to their place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations of the head to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both sides are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit out of their places, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hanging towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with the word.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more dispositions.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it carefully, and do not spare.
And in such a manner that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and put his thumbs into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be outside, to put it equal; and command the patient to soften them, his mandibles, and move them in all ways.
And the thumbs put it equal, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back with pain, even if it are the two jaws together, so apply hot water and oil, until they are moved gently; do not hesitate to bring it back as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, apply on a cloth moistened in oil rose and wax, then tie it lightly with soft ligatures.
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but eats light food, until the pains are gone, and the jaws are set.
and then gently move him and do not bother to open the mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be put in place within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fever and accustomed chills come, and perhaps a stomach disorder, and perhaps vomiting of pure phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many times those who have it die within eight days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from within the rib cage and of the hip, and it is dislocated no time outwards, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place with the form of your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and bandage, and restrain it;
And the shoulder which is toward the rib cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient that he rest until he is healed;
And in the same way is brought back the shoulder blade, when it is dislodged from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: for one, it is dislocated to the part of the socket below; and the second is to the part of the armpit; and by chance, dislocated to the upper part, which rarely happens.
and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder, and not inside toward the nerves; and many times dislocated below towards the socket, especially to those who have little flesh, because in them it exits easily; to those who have enough flesh, it leaves with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And by chance, it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore it behoves you to examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation when it is down towards the shoulder, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their variety manifest. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and under the shoulder to touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one piece; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move of any movements;
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching;
and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise to be returned, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient upward, then put their palms below the buttock, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it downward; so it will come gradually.
And if it does not come as we have said with hands in a few days after, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the minister a softening and soothing ointment, such as a decoction of althea and fennel and honey in water, and it should be administered;
then be covered the patient on his back, and put under the buttock a piece of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the shoulder onto the cloth, and lift the head of the shoulder virtuously, and draw the hand of the patient;
and other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns now, and if you see so you reset it according to this manner
and that you make present one man who is greater than the patient; and be right towards the ribs, and put his shoulder under the seat of the patient, and raise the seat upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air and other ministers pull the hand of the patient downward towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so they put with him any thing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And it is reset also in another manner: and one long stick is stuck into the earth, whose head be as a pistol, and not too thick nor too thin; then be placed beneath the patient, but that he have soft cloths above, and the patient lie long upon the staff; then be extended his hand away on the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place immediately
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, so do this cure: take one splint of two arms long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded to fit enter into under the armpit, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the staff cloths soft, so that the staff does not bruise the patient, then put it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm upon the staff long, and tie the shoulder onto the staff, and the arm at the hand's chief, then put the arm upon one rung of a ladder wide, and be extended the hands down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the seat a sphere of wool equal, then put the emplasters sprinkled with powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of an egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the seat evenly, and turn the linen on the emplaster, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he moisten it a little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal more quickly; and then moisten it more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and is not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at three points, as it is shown in the chapter on cautery.
And if you do all these things, and it comes apart after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by an impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers in another place; and care until it be healed.
And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slow movements, then have the patient bathe many times, until that pain be alleviated, and return to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the cut
Know that the joint of the cut is dislocated in places and returns to its places; and it has been dislocated from all sides, and even in front and behind, and the dislocations are not restored because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the diseased knife with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. Because the joint is stuck and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And you must reset it thus as soon as an abscess comes from there, because if the abscess came afterward, it would be painful to reset it; and by chance, it may not be able to be reset completely at all, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is like this, when it can be brought back, that you extend your hand to her two hands; and let his arms be spread, and the hands do look according to the cut around, before and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm of the root of the palm the cut that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then that you have enveloped a double long and wide drapeil;
and when the mire joins the joint to its hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then puts the joint together, until it comes back.
and when it is in place, she puts on a dry plaster with the yolk of an egg, and strains it together, and bends the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leaves it for some days, then unties it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not tightening well, reapply the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if he feels pain after the setting of the joint, and it moves, bathe it and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or place on the joint a fleece of fat mutton, then leave it for i. day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter into a bath; And when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the nail back on, and then go into the bath; and thus do it .ij. times or .iij., until it is healed; and if you see, put on linen of moist chaff heated with butter, and strain it on top; it will return to its disposition.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints. Nonetheless, it must be brought back to its place immediately, in the very hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not swell, or so that a hot abscess may come.
And the return is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he puts it straight, so that it puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; then put the sick person's back of his hand on a table at the extension and return. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the sick person's back of his hand on the table, and he puts his hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If not, then strain with soothing plasters abscesses, and leave it so without restarting.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, the joint remains crooked.
And harms nothing to the patient except that as long as his hand is numb, and cannot restrain anything at all: therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other remedy except to tighten by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then tighten it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
No times are dislocated the finger of the hand on each side, no times on the back of the palm or on the belly;
therefore are the finger and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and lean it toward the part where it is disjointed;
and let it for .ij. days, and then put it even that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and untie it every day, and make it move, and tie it again; and do this often, until it is straight;
and also do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more than one dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the limbs jump or move without will, and cannot be held, and many times they are softened any limb, or the two thighs or one of the arms.
And many times the spine moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure for this is that you reward if the gilbositez came from childhood; there is no cure or healing of the whole.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said methods of cures by great pronouncements, or there is no great profit in all.
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
I say that in the inflammation that comes to the breast before, there is no medicine or health.
And also that which comes straight in two ribs, and it cannot be cured except the one properly that comes to the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient be extended on his face in one place even, and have constraint below him, so that he does not move.
Then place one splint at the head in the earth forming a mound, and another one at the feet, and tie one rope under the armpits of the patient, and one other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
and the minister knowing the limbs, one to the head and the other at the feet, among the 2 bones;
and be well closed, the splint as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine forming, until it revives.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of 3 arms long, and place it under the armpit, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the armpit, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mire his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, so do it at the lathe which turns by hand.
And it is that you put two sticks at the head of the patient's arm of great length, and towards the feet two others, and there be between each stick, inside and outside, a palm's width of space long;
and there be in each stick one hole where the turner passes, and let the sticks be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each two sticks there be one turning stick, by which the thread turns, and there be in two turnings two small sticks of a palm's length, to turn the turner;
and then tie the thread which is among the spindles to the turner towards the head, and the other thread towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner on all the thread, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is evened out, place a desiccant plaster with an abundance of egg white on it, and then the bandages, and then the strap of a tablet of 3 finger lengths long, which stretches between the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a band as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
And if any thing comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and assuaging medicines, with the strap that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood.
And sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have presumption; by chance it might bring death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out as dislocations, and do not come out like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and a little dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens the patient's knees more than the healthy ones, and the sick person cannot double his knee at the fire. and it is the one that is below swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes at the fire, is that this accident are contrary to those before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well aligned according to completion; however, he does not bend the knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot before, and he holds back his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes on the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the hip joint is at the place under the ribs.
The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you should examine if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for care; and he should not have any presumption.
And in this of which the dislocation is fresh, and it is .iiij. manners of dislocation, so hasten that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perchance it will return, and has no need of other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, so it is necessary that you prepare .i. minister strong, and extend the leg strongly to .ii. hands, or to .i. linen that should be tied above the knee; and other ministers extend his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then the strap of linen above the hip; and another holds the head of the linen;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains standing.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, then it is necessary to take care of its resemblance. When the dislocation is at the side, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy hip, then put the ligature on the root of the thigh, and the place which is below the groin, then extend the ligature upwards towards the groin, and towards the forceps;
then take other ministers to his arms, and embrace the large part of the diseased hip, and extend it outwards in a straight form; now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is easier than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen cloth above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the sick leg be extended two fingers more than the other;
Then be suspended on the top of a pole, and be two arms long above the ground; then command to one minister that he embrace the head of the groin, and let other ministers stand with the sick person, who firmly embrace the groin, because the joint returns now quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the outside, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and restrain one linen cloth on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also;
Then put 2 sticks, 1 at the head and 1 other at the foot, then put 1 stick between the thighs of the patient in the middle of the shape; And have a plant of wet cloths around him so that he does not bleed the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let the one who has his hands put it back into its place;
If it returns, it is good. If not, put him on 1 table, and press him as we have said in the yellowing, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the one who has his hands on the painful area of the diseased knee, then press with the other hand, and gently push it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the patient down, nor raise his leg up, but rather that he be as if his hip was dislocated in the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips; and be upon his face, and the limb is extended as we have said above, and one must press on the joint to the table;
and it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; therefore adjust the thighs, and put the splint on, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and rest for 3 or 4 days, then untie it, and put the splint on again; and if you see that they are equal, strap it as before, and leave it for 3 days; then untie it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he cannot bring it to his hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and withdraw between your two, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will be able to move his leg to his hip lightly.
And put the plaster on it, and make the leg rest to the hip, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not try to walk until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not right, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated both inside and outside.
And the signs of it are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
Its reduction is light, and one should extend it gently with their hands when it is only dislocated.
And when it is dislocated from the whole, then it is fitting that you make the patient sit straight, and hold him by one minister besides the leg, above the ankle;
then treat the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then the leg upward, and push the foot beautifully upwards;
and do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, begin the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on earth, and insert one stake firmly in the earth between his hips, and tie wraps around it, so that it does not hurt the patient;
Then make the ministers hold the thigh, and some other ministers extend their foot to their hands or at one end, so that they hold it on the neck of the foot Then extend each minister evenly, and the straps be placed between the hips of the patient in order to hold the patient when one extends them
Then put the mirrors evenly on the dislocation with their hands, and some other ministers hold the sound leg below, and the dislocation will return easily.
And when it is set, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and the restraint forms, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves which are above the ankle behind, so that the ties are not too tight;
Then let him leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligaments soften, then strain it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to go out for 4 days; And if he goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to this, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
Of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to properly extend them without effort, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a table completely straight, and put your foot on what separates these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is aligned, and there is nothing separating it, then put under the sole of the foot a table at two spans, then strain it firmly, and let it remain for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he is healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitying and merciful and patient, nor too bold.
And at the beginning of things, use soothing poultices to a hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you do not see hope of health. And when you see hope [in the patient], then reset the limb now, so that the abscess may heal there;
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and treat the wound, as it should, with dried ointments;
and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and broken small bones dislocate them, and do what we have said in simple ailments;
and keep yourself from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body. Amen
