O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine altogether with its fulfillment, and have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery."
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all, so is the science perished and cut off, and nothing remains of its forces but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I want to bring it back to life together with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is lengthened. And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of them, and their movement and of those that move and those that are still, and the place of their issue.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that with the name it is much, and with the work it is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
We say to you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, let him beware lest he fall into error and harm people; just as I have often seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their knowledge and experiments.
Because I saw a fool who pierced, that is, an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and pierced her arteries in the neck; for which reason so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed it with part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called for this treatment, and see the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
And I saw another surgeon who took care of one duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture there was a wound; and the surgeon full of ignorance forced the fracture onto the wound as stars by strong ligature, and did not let any ointment on the wound, and left it so; and he commanded him that he would not untie it; and remained so that the leg became completely swollen and the foot came to ruin.
I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it it was in peace and he felt no pain.
But all ways the corruption was already confirmed or member, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member until the members were all lost.
And see i. another mire who burst i. abscess inflamed and then by the evil of his lordship.
For ulcer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not behoove that one touches it with iron if it is not in such place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: that is to say, work where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you watch over yourself, so that the foolish observer may not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the fearsome diseases of grief health; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Gaius says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of any bad disease, lest you be called a foolish observer."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are ordered from the head to the feet; and of the shapes of the instruments, and the ferments of the cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of leeches and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it befits me to say the quality of the aid and of the ailment of each complextion.
I say that the quality of the aid and of the ailment is the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret responses; and of these speak the most sages, and agree with them; and I suffice myself little to their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cautery aids universally to every complexion where it has matter, for two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some debated and said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the contrary: that cautery is not good for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured by a hot illness by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry illness that comes in the body of men. For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it never by experience.
And in all ways, let no one interfere besides he who has experienced it and knows through long usage the chapter of cauteries and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space of time;  we have no more fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and harms no other member whatsoever.
The burning medicines come from one member to another in spreading, and bring to the member diseases of grave healing; and by chance kill the patient.
Fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I would rob you of the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, just as the philosopher says when demonstrating; now receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauteries should be made, and when they are to be done.
And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms arising are lessened by the help of cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains before and until they can wait for a time when greater malice comes to the member.
And never think as do the fools who stare; for the sickness which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are only medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is more useful than medicine for the speed of its virtue, and for the power of its work and its mastery.
And a wondrous thing is that sickness comes at no time according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the sickness and its virtue; and they are gathered together in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauteries administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of lead for pain, and similar things, and the same pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their intentions are false, and it is cautery the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they are not worth, then we administer cautery, and it works. Therefore it appears well that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the burn from cautery does not make rot, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some men; and gold cautery works better than iron, as they said.
And altogether when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and if it is too soon cooled; and if it is heated too much; so they do at the fire; and thus there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our fire cautery which we have made apparent in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head down to the feet, for that the way may be lighter to find.
Of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two done because of a sickness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and tooth pain and throat pain, and also for all sicknesses that come from cold such as paralysis and stroke and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a laxative medicine, modifying the head iii. or iv., according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can suffer; and then make rear the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on your feet; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two fingers will come, if it bleeds then extinguish the cautery which is called "olivare", because this is the form:
And place it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand back and forth turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone i.e. a little; and if you don't see it, then begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take i. pinch of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and place on the place, and let him for iii days; after put upon cotton moistened in butter; and let stay until the burning is removed; after cure the wound of the ointment which is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it is healed.
And they said the ancients, that when more a wound stays open, more it purges; and for this reason they helped move it.
And they said some of these that one must leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then re-sew that which is burned of the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one should leave the cautery so, and push so strongly that it pushes down the bone as wide as a .i. whorl that women put in their spindles for that the humors may be moved out; and one should leave the wound open long; afterwards one should clean and bind.
And these .ij. manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; for the head is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and better for me, and from this use I work then altogether healthy.
of the old pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts a long time, the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not good.
Take heed if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and that it not be too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery one prick as we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there are one of them in which one puts suction cups; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged by medicines cooling, and one has made the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this profits not: then I do cautery according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine acrid and of fire.
The cautery of acrid medicine is that you take a piece of garlic, and remove the skin and cut it 1 pock as 2 fingers, and then make in the temple where the pain holds in such manner that you can put back the piece of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed thus you tie it and restrain well and leave it so for 12 hours; and then untie it and take out the piece of garlic, and leave the wound so for 2 days or 3; then put on top cotton dipped in butter until it covers it.
After the cure of ointment until it is healed; and if you see that this is done with some burning medicines that I have written or in the following treatment of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is thus according to this manner. Heat the cautery of that which is the shape:
And is called "clo" because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has .i.  inch of curve, and in the middle a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and restrain the fire a little lightly, until the half of the thickness of the heart be burned; and lift your hand that the artery does not burn, that is outside, and flows abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the place for .iij. days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at all the point, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this migraine which is not so ancient.
Of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not help him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and then place it on the aching spot a line of half a finger long, and remove your hand once, and strain that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone; and guard yourself from the jaw moving when one brings it together, and the nerves do not see but that they are still and that spasms do not come to the patient, and guard yourself from bleeding of the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so for him who does not know about it, and who is not studying and experienced; and leave the work in half way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij.  blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
of the pain of ears from cold
When pain comes to the ear from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then scavenge this cautery which is called "point", for this is its form:
After point all around the ear of the sick, or to two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a little bit upwards from the root of the ear after that you have signaled the place to burn; and have ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torment which must be cured by cautery is not for others than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of maladies; and do not make cautery to resemblances that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of eyes and expectorations of the head and gargarisms, and these are not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with 3 cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a point of fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and let the cautery be done to the head of the ear above a point below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery so long that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And is the semblance of the curette that we have put before, but it is a point more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a point larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and .i. in the middle of the head, and .i. where it is called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
Of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that warm the brain; after having raised the head of the patient, and placing on the back of the head a plaster of mustard as is written in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: if I do so as I have said.
If it is healthy like this, good is; and if it is not, then to him make three cauteries from the top of the head descending to the neck, and have a space between each cautery two fingers' breadth; and cure it as the others, and if you see it joining together, and the patient suffers, do one cautery in the middle; and if necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and let the cauteries be called «olivare», as I have said before.
from the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and of what we have said before; after having rinsed the head of the patient, then do cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more need, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the malady is severe, then do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most part of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is healthy, and let the cautery be called «olivare» that we have said before.
of epilepsy
The epileptic patients should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from bad medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, then make gargarismes and chewing that modify the brain often with good meats; after that, place the crown on their head in the middle, and there make one cautery according to what we have said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is ill and suffering, then do cauteries like I said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, then make one subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by reason of melancholy there are excesses or corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then the cautery with such cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by reason of melancholy the excesses decline to melancholy, and the body of the sick man is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After having anointed the head of the sick man; after making one tortel of linen well made, as well as one circle, place it in the middle of the head; and let the sick man sit crossed, and be held well on all sides; after applying the liniment, and melt wax of old sheep's butter; and heat it gently over the fire so that the patient may endure if it is burned; after emptying the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick man every week once with another good governance, until he is healthy.
Or if you see cauterizing him by making many points all over the cautery. This way of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then puts on a cotton soaked in butter and fat of gelling.
of the opening of the eyes When the opening of the eyes comes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient something purifying the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times fasting.
After that command him to bring back his head, and make cautery in the middle of the head, and make 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descent of the opening is to the 2 eyes together, or one if the descent is to one; and cut through all the cauteries veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against a decrease of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, so staunch it with as much power as you have.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or haterel under the two bones behind.
Of the tears' courses
When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the art descending to the eyes: 1 cautery in front of the temple, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or haterel under the 2 bones; and if it is needed more, then cauterize sagely above the eyebrow with all small cautery.
Of the tears' courses from within the eyes
When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three nuts of wine; after which bathe his head and apply the cautery or a medium olive cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery called “clavilis” on the two shoulders, one below the cheeks; and guard yourself from the artery that you do not cover it. And this is the shape of the cautery called “clavilis”:
When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called “olivare.” From this comes the shape:
And if you see so make .ij. cauteries on the .ij. eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except while the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
hairs that prick the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelid, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to .ij. manners: that is to say of fire, or of ardent medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they grow and are equal, then place the patient on his back; after draw upon the paper of the eyes a figure that be as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and muslin of pellitory over the eye, then heat the cautery to this form.
After cauterize upon the figure that you have signed point and point many times, so that the hairs be burned at that place; and the signs of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs lifted to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave thus for 3 days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after cure with ointment as long as it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery upon that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are far away, so cauterize until the paper be raised to its natural place, and be equal, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
The cautery of medicine burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make of parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take of French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and do it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread on the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put under the eyes; and if the patient holds in .i. eye only, then must one work in .i., and if in both also; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the egg white; and let the head of the patient be in your lap and put your two hands on the medicine, and press .i. pock and the loaf every time that the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for it feels the sting as of fire. When you have done this long time, then remove the medicine with your hand. And when the sting has passed, then lift the eyelid, and look if you see the paper lifted as if it had been lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If this is not the case, then put back some medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your workings are even, and your eyes set; then put cotton moistened in butter until the burned skin is healed, after curing the wound with ointment that is called "dyafenis" and other, until it is healthy.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care that it does not fall from the medicine to the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterward, and the hair prickles in the eye, then begin the medicine again on the one part which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the cure as long as it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose study is this art.
of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your lap; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he lower his head; after putting moistened cotton in vinegar or in parsley juice on the eye; after heat the cautery which is like: and is shaped like the quill of a goose feather, together with which the cautery should be; if you see fit, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see fit, as well as a tent; but nevertheless, this which is shaped is useful for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and remove the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, operate on it, and treat outside the bow; after place the hot cautery form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the eyelid above the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and put the cautery in the grease of the eye, and corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good. If those are not, start the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and let it for 3 days; after I put on cotton moistened in butter, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, then put on medicine with corrosive aqua until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what comes in his chapter.
And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to the fistula, and cut it open; after put in the opening 1 camphor subtle of which this is the form: And it is made in the quantity of 3 of plumb; and hold your hand or camphor firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the melted plumb does not run to his eye; and it is necessary that one puts on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in almond oil or in egg: the plumb will seal the place of the fistula, and the healing by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to administer ointment to the skin, and bring the fistula back to the body of the skin according to what is fitting in its proper place.
Of crevices in lips Many times there occur crevices in the lips that are called "poils," and even on the lips of children.
When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then apply i. a small scalpel cautery according to this form:
And put it carefully in those openings until it comes to the bottom; after care the place with cerate until it is healed.
Of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and broken, and is ulcerated and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it behooves you to have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the boil or pierce of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron comes to the bottom of it, and its last place; and do this once or twice, after the cure of what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it behooves you to discover the place and remove the decayed bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
Of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that is not worthwhile, then put the head of the patient in your hand; after heats the cautery whose form will come later in this manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot gently, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; after fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and keep it for one hour and spit out hard.
And in this manner the tooth which was moving is so confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dries.
of the pain of teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the remedies of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery in two ways: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cauterizing of butter is such that you take butter of sheep's milk, and the end in a spoonful of iron or steel; after taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a skewer, and soaking it in hot melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold it until it cools; and thus do often as many times as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so soaked wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one heated iron above it until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
The fire cauteries altogether are such that you take a piece of iron or steel, and be so thick that the heat does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, for which the form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be removed on that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter at the time of this cautery, and then rakes it out; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrofulas are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the head as follows comes after, and it has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cautery to the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put cotton moistened in butter on top until the burn is gone; after cure the place of dressings and tents until it is healed.
When the moistures overcome on the channels of the pharynx, and also when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first voided by solutive medicines; after that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and keep that you do not come near the throat, and burn no more than one point. After that, make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" be according to what we have previously described; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the wound When all and sickness of  the body are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the sickness is ancient, if one makes two cauteries on the forcele in their places; and one other cautery between the two nipples; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see, make cautery pricking to all the cautery which is called "poins" for that its form is before in the sickness of the ears; and let the poins be up to thirty, or as much as it can. After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be three rains according to this form:
And for that these are the lighter cauteries, for that you make three at a time.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, so support the patient on his back and on his ribs; afterward lift the heart which is within with the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, then heat the cautery which has .ij. ners [?], for this is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and should come the figure of the cautery together four cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has .iij. ners, because the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
And sometimes is joined on this, i.e. nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery properly ground with wool; after make rest the patient, and let not move his limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the cauterization clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. For the jointure is closed, and is removed the moisture and is healed the patient.
of the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one should make on the pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in such manner: take a root of aristologe long, the largest that you will be able to find, and be it dry, and be it also as thick and as long as your thumbs; and the moisten in oil, and the press in the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two little cauteries a point going down in the part that is under the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a point; and one cautery in the middle of the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as two ribs under from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it openly as if smelling.
And the ancients said that no man uses a cautery of fire seeming like one razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and goes out the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or there comes a fistula which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the ailment of mice as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve, then there are three kinds of cautery that are good.
Of these, one way is that you make three or four cauteries, lining them according to the length of the mice, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand on the whole cautery, and let the patient lie supine on his back;
And another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two nubs, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the kernel which is on the mice, or the side where the ailment's cut comes from towards the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the kernel be according to the kernel, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries according to the width of the body.
After it puts the two nerves inflamed until the kernels are pierced on the other side, and then pulls out the cautery, and thus in there will be four. And if you see it, so cauterize all the cautery to three nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before said.
of dropsy
Cauteries are not good for dropsy, except for in the manner called "ascites." When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not profit, then it behooves you to make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the breast; and let the cauteries be well close to the edge of the heart.
After leave the cautery open for festering long time, and do not let the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have in front shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is put forward.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in those who are hydrophic, and are full of  yellowish fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too much in depth, thus will be driven out the yellowish fluid, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After make upon .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg to the point of the cuttlefish; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee forward and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries over long without curing, that they may enter into it; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that is in stomach and in intestine are bled, and cannot be cured by manners of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, so make one great cautery upon the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, at the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the subtle bud all one cautery clavil subtil, and two cauteries on the loins.
And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the dagger, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are on the foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are large humors cold and moist corrupted, and they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not help, if cauteries are made: three on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below the armpit point to point in a triangle, and one cautery under the buttocks two fingers;
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swollen, then on the face make one large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the mice to all the clavicle cautery; and leave the cautery open long time. After the cure the place as long as it is healthy.
of the flesh which is called "thelul"
When you cut the "thelul," sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on that "thelul" cut; and leave it there as long as the cautery comes to the base of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of beneficial ointments as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the flesh, it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then comes such a disease that can only be healed by cauterization.
When a fistula comes to any one and is filled and rotten with corrupted moisture, then you must first probe it thoroughly with a probe, and guard that you know the extent of the probe how much it has gone in. After cauterize the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe went into, and re-begin the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of its need; and guard yourself from burning the nerve that are there, and the large veins. If the fistula goes towards the body of the bladder and the intestine, then guard these places, and do not make cuts except in their fleshy part, and think that it is not pierced; after cure the place as long as it is healthy, and if the place is healed, and the matters are removed long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is troubled, and corrupted bone at its foundation; and thus as one of these that we will say in its place.
of the disease of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great flatulence, and does not take (medicine) for woman, then it behooves you to make a cautery upon the kidneys on one part and on the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will do more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and soft from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs begin at the groin, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as a finger; and you make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need it; and let the cauteries be shaped according to the form previously stated.
of the kidneys When the kidneys are cold and moist, and do not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are slow to come; and when they do come, there is great pain: therefore it behooves one to make three cauteries around the waist, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be shaped like a wedge, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the hip joint, and because of this they move out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the location is found in the region above the hip, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the hip joint at i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle; and let the cautery be like that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then make iij. cauteries of the olive-sized large ones, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and treat until it is healed.
of the hip pain When pain comes in the hip joint and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then you must purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-seeming pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to 2 manners: that is to say together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. The fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint 3 triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them good depth and large, and have between each cautery a space the size of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes it is done to cauterize in the middle on the top of the hip, for which there are 4 according to this form:
And if you want, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart be burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds him, and .i. cautery above the ankle .iiij. fingers, on the left side a point; and whether the cauteries are cutting or burned the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two fingers of the foot or near it, then one cauterizes where he feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. at the cautery which is called "points."
And if it is necessary, one makes more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the cutting or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do not make more harm and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so much that the leg was all swollen, and the foot too, and was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a solution of the belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner. // And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, from which this is the manner, make one such iron and be at the head also thick as a hazelnut of finger, or a little less, and be between stitches and be from one stitch to another with spacing the quantity of a knuckle; and let the stitches be towards two parts, and be also like nuts, and have one hand of iron well made; and this is the form:
And be heated until it is all red and feels hot, and then put it on the bone of the sick hip, and be turned onto the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery return and let it leave three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim said that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and it is seen little who uses it; and nonetheless those are good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it is needed.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by too great evacuation, or by similar appearance of cold matter spread, to none of these appearances is cautery suitable, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this, that the patient be free of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on their back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with enche, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery which is called "poins"; and if you see it, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the clavile cautery middle according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a constricted belly when they cry, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
When you see this and you will cure it, cauterize it with the cautery according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines, and let the points be near each other. After cure the place as long as it is healed according to what we have said, and guard that you do not bring cautery in a cavity which is in nerve spame.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints are from dampness which are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, that the wise call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and cures by medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive according to this form:
And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then you make cautery to the whole cautery as one claims "point". And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then you make cautery on each knee three or four cauteries of each part, to the whole olive cautery; and if you have need for more, then you make more, but do not hold your hand further than while the tip of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then make points around the socket two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and do good governance to the patient and pure medicines. For if you do good governance to him and you purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the sciatic nerve
When rupture comes in the groin, and the balls descend to the thighs, and it is new, then when you see it healed, that he does not move his leg that day; and that he uses things which make the belly softer, so that the bowels descend from his belly; after that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the balls are repaired, and move them to your sides, and take a sign of a half-circle above the groin; then burn the cautery with this form:
until it is white and it feels hot. Then move the balls to their place; and the minister holds his hand above so that they do not return backward; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one bandage on the thighs, and one other on the leg which keeps his hands; then place the cautery on the sign with all your strength, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, restart it again until you come to the bone; and be careful that the balls do not jump when you do the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that by this the patient does not die, or other evils.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to their measure, and for big people as big according to their measure; after 3 days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burning is removed; after that cure other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his dressings be long so that the balls do not jump when he wants to go to bed.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is given to him, and it is worn for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he does not work too much and be wary of too much drink and eating, and of too much bragging; and when he follows this teaching, he will be entirely healed. And I will say afterwards the cure of the thigh in its chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are recognized, and you see that they do not grow anymore, to him make 1 cautery of the cautery reont according to its quantity, and be it at the third of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with the cautery at 3 angles according to this form:
But first sign the place of the inche and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another outside, and hold your hand over all the cautery clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of torsions and of its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, begin again with another cautery on top of it, because it is customary that it must be moved to the member that is closest to it, so it is necessary for you to make the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of mixture
The mixtures are aided at times by cautery with great help, and also the patient that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. As you see them cauterized, take care if the patient is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not send nor stay, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the patient, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. remove the head to nine, and the other towards the front at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the back of the neck; and let your hand so that the cauteries come up to the bone, and as long as the skins go out so that the vapors of the thick humors can issue; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is in front.
And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it manifests itself clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the middle of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great one on the hip and .i. other near the groin, and .ij. on the .ij. shoulders; and .ij. on the ribs, and .ij. on the tendons of the thigh, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the lower heel, that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done to cauterize on the bone of the arm, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
And knows that when more there is made cautery, more it does help, and moves him profit; and knows that the patient feels no pain in cautery as much as the healthy ones feel it, because the body is already all corrupt. And it behoves that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in manners of irons. After cure its place with flour of times with honey and other cures until it be healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be one point deep into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with dressings until it be healed. And sometimes one makes cautery and in the hand and in the foot and in the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus is removed the swelling; and nevertheless do not intervene anyone unless he is knowing of the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of almonds
When the malady that is called "albaras" is enfeebling, and the means of medicine are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the species of heart, until the white part is removed and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of beans and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood from the colon and blood from the alondre, each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
The cure of syphilis by cautery
When syphilis appears at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery that seems like a circle, all around the chancre. And nonetheless, the wise ones say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the chancre; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen before. And the more right thing is that it be cauterized around, with a cautery that is called "circule," as we have said in much of cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot heal
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it takes a long time to heal, or because of the superfluity that it makes, or because of the blood of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you see it hasten to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; after which leave it as it is. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it becoming worse with the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with this form:
And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery pierces the core, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it burning from within in such a way that the course of the rot is alleviated. Afterward, care for it until it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
There is another way of illness which is called "corroding", and it is nothing else but a gangrene of the limb, because it rots the limbs just like fire rots dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can endure cauterization with fire, then burn small and large cauteries on them, according to what is fitting for the place where the disease is; after which cauterize all sides until you remove all corruption, so that nothing of it remains, that all that is corrupted is removed. And then let it be for 3 days, and put over the cauterized places a softened broil with oil until the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption. Then after the cure of healing-bringing flesh. And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then begin again the cautery on what remains corrupted.  And this gangrene has been cured sometimes with a medicine of water in place of fire cauterization; but nonetheless, fire cauterization is more helpful, and I have already said the cure of the water medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
from the roots that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet by fire are born a sickness which is called «clos» according to our understanding, and it is a large thing that spoils the foot. And the cauteries of this sickness are so in .ij. ways. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. The cautery of fire so is that you heat .i. cautery cheveit as it is a feather of vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can hold the nail from all sides, and that it have subtle edges; after that put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let him so .iij. days until it begins to give rot; then I do a plaster of wild malves ground with seil, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will fall and be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment enclosing flesh as much as is healthy.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happens in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in such a manner: take a chain of iron or iron, or a feather of vulture, and put on the nail and the other one, that is to say porrelz warts; and put the chain so that it holds all around, then put a pot of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water way deep to the root; and suffer the patient a while the biting of the hot water an hour; then let him, and he will be uprooted at all his roots. Thus do one after another, as long as you eradicate all those that are in the body, then cure them with ointments that enclose flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or from quartan fever or another, it is fitting that you make to them four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or weight, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery; so will he stop trembling, and hasten the health from the cold sickness.
of suppurating pustules
Sometimes pustules appear on the body bathed in fire, or suppurating pustules, that come from large corrupted matters. Thus it is fitting at first when they appear that one make cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that its point be seized by fire, or of long arnica root, or at the lentil-shaped cautery. And sometimes the cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow further in advance, but are disrupted the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or to the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is very grievous thing to be prolonged.
And nevertheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger index upon the wound of the vein, and restrain it very much until the blood is appeased under your finger, and no more drops out; then put on fire the olive cauteries more small and great as many as they are red; then grasp i., or large or small according to the wound and its place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery upon that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery as long as the bleeding is restrained.
And if it leaps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily i. other of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to make them one after the other until the vein is stretched; and watch that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when a vein runs out of the artery, it cannot be well stretched even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying of a thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and let it be bound and constrained firmly.
Who will bring the tightening of linen or straps tightly or putting burning things on, or similar things, if it does not benefit, no.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he must put his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but moisten the hand with cold water often that it be very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and stretched; and make those in advance which he needs for cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and their incisions, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it more easily what they want.
And so, since I begin this one, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason, greater caution is needed.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.  For many kinds of people come to cures. They come from those who are so weakened by their illness that they die easily because of the ignorance they find in their disease, and of the greatness of their malice; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give their sense, and say: “Wait, I am cured”; and the disease is spiteful. It does not become you that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more great caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not operate foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain of, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognosis and indication in cures of your patients so that health be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and memory of long.
Very dear son, May our Lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you will aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered you this chapter by chapters, according to that which it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised from the head to the feet, for those that you find more easily those of which you will need.
The head full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife pulls the head of the child too hard; and some times it comes from a cause unknown.
And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and to all those that I have seen it has hastened death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the work in such cures.
And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until it could not be supported; and so much moisture accumulated that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such when the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide opening; and let it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture goes; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the sutures of the head open on each side, and the water leaps out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not return to you: then it is necessary that you cut in the middle of the head three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision extract the moisture entirely outwards. After extract the slits of drapes and powders, and put there wine and oil, and leave thus until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound by tents and ointments, and let the chief bandage remain tightened, and then feed the patient dry meat from a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another manner of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of water, and open it according to what you have power; and beware that you do not sever the artery; and vein flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of rheum
When it happens to any one a malady that is called «catarre» in the eyes or at the breast, and the illness is old, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last cure is the cautery with those one covers the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see to cover them, that the patient make his head back; after rub their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then restrain the patient his neck with one cloth; then look where the vein beats, and the places of one and the other are after the ears, and so they are placed; then sign the places of each, then cut both with an acute spatula of two parts. As long as the incision reaches to the bone, and this is by the wide side of the head.
And if you see, plunge the spatula below the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, blood jumps out from above continuously.
And if the artery does not open at the touch, you must measure the space of three fingers, then seize and cut up to the bone; and that which it is necessary to let out blood is six finger widths, and perhaps one more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point without a sign of pus, cut it so that an abscess does not come there, then restrain the wound and tie it, and care with ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine
When an old migraine comes, and acute catarrh, for the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient foreskin and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all those do not benefit it, then we drain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient make rear the hairs of his temples, and attend to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outside than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it is strained its neck the patient from some cloths, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and rose the place of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then pull it up as pincers, and depart well from the tissues that are under each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the forceps, then cut it off from that side according to the quantity of .ij. fingerbreadths. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out entirely at all.
And draw out the blood from .vj.  c/ to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in .ij. lengths with a strong double thread of silk, so that putrefaction does not come before the sewing of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut the superfluity which is between the .ij. ligatures in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with the cupped cautery up to the bone until the fingerbreadths are cut; and this is the best work, if the patient has no fever and he is of a hot complexion.
For the cautery is aid to finish the moisture: for this reason it is of greater help against the moisture. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put tents well made on top; and when they are untied, be careful to use dry medicines that cause flesh to grow, and tents, until it is healed; and if without a piece of the artery as much as you work on it, then hurry to cover it with cautery, or you put the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the blood stops; and if you don't have those present, put on the place your thumb until the bleeding ceases, and raise the place of cold water until the bleeding stops, and be strained as is necessary; and what is most effective and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant of .ij. parts, but let the trenches be well spaced to hold their heat for longer. For when the instruments are too thick, they hold less heat. And it must have between the two knives one that is a good thickness, and then when you have signed in the two sides, and you put the red hot iron over until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two fingers; and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not joined of this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears of the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head of fur, and it does not profit any cure of medicine is done, and you see the face of the patient encircle, and feels on the forehead walk like of a trembling; and where oil are wet and moist so that the hair of the papers are falling, and are dried out the papers, and scorched by the ardor of the tears, so it needs this cure.
And they called it in the old days "contused cure," and it is that you do behind to the patient who has this sickness the hairs that he have or front, then him make .iij. cuts or front equally according to the length of the front; and let one of the cuts be as .ii. doing all the way through the front in going down until the nose, and the others .ii. at .ii. ribs above the ears, and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries that are at the .ii. ribs above the ears; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ii. mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of .iij. fingers across joined;
from the incision which is over the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the marrow that is between the .ii. cuts at all the fascia that is above the bone, then make another from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract further this spatula
If put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form: And put the sharp side towards the flesh towards the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and thrust it until it reaches the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to that which opens near the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle fissure up to the other opening; and then extract the blood evenly, and express the wound for the drawn blood; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and asiel, and guard that abscesses do not come there; and on the third day untie the linen, and then administer a great quantity of tepid water, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures as for curing wounds, until it is healed.
of the eye's
When to any come a sharp catarrh, and you see the eyes watery and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in them make an acute pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come but from many veins, and the moisture cure that is there, so is this.
And is that you command the patient to rear his forehead, then make a great gash between the brow, and another wide one.  i.e. poc. And begin from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move in the mouth; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the .ij. edges of the gash and put old cotton there, and linen bandages; then tie above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and keep yourself away from a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone as long as char begins to rise, then cure it with drying things that make char begin to harden.
In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flower, and .iiij. parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to cause char to grow throughout.
of the stopping of ears
All that which falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, as beans, lentils, peas; or flowing thing as water and oils and similar things.
When something falls into the ear, a stone or another manner of thing that does not join to the ear nor grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, distill any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make him sneeze with condiment, and stop his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Often it comes forth by this cure; and if it does not come forth, administer extraction with fine pincers, for this is the form:
If it jumps forth with the pincers, that is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine instrument of small doubleure; and if it does not jump forth by this, make a chain of iron and put the head of the chain or through the opening of the ear forcefully, and stop what is around the chain with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the chain; then pull forth forcefully, for often it comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come forth in this manner, take a gut which they use to catch birds, and put into some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around; then press the gut on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forth. And if it does not follow all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut open the ear so as an abscess comes out, and spasms; and the manner of cutting it is that you first make the patient healthy in the head, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and making a small cut at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends; and let the cut be like a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it gently with your mouth; and the care until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer i. spatula tenve subtle according to this form:
and administer incision of that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist for the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with subtle pincers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear when water falls, it is appropriate for the patient to use a first-aid of a compress and open the ear with old cotton. And let him lie on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out by this, it is good. If it doesn't come out, take many pebbles according to the length of your finger, light and easy, and heat them a little in the fire; and put them in the patient’s one pierced ear, and put on top of it from the other side, and place another stone on the stone that is in the ear; and don't stop doing this of stone by stone until all the water comes out, and so it will come out entirely. And if you see it, take a reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end catch fire until the tip of the reed burns; then redo another with other reeds until the water is entirely gone, as we have said before with the pebbles.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large-bodied that one can feel it, administer an extraction with tweezers; and it is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and where we treated distillations, and the cure does not benefit, it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, then treat them with fine tweezers, and if they don't appear, take the dog of which this is the form:
And let it be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed them throughout the entire caine; do this often as long as all the worms come out.  And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff around the caine with cotton as I said in the piere; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them treating distillations; and if you distill your oils and your medicines in the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see:
And let it be of silver or of iron, narrow below with i. small holes, and wide above to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation i. instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take i. razor and wrap around the tip conveniently cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the caine, and let the caine be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be i. pock heated at the fire as it is distilled in the ear; and guard that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stuffing of ears
No child is born without a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the clogging of a wound, or flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages come sometimes from within the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes there are i.e., a poke of pus, and it can be seen well.
That which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of great harm in many dispositions, and in this case you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all these spatumiles of which this is the form.
And be sharp and trenchant before and behind all plain, so that it does not blister the ear; if the opening is of flesh growing or a piece of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, until that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the suppuration is in the ear, take one razor subtle and light and heat it a little at the fire, then put it into the body of the ear. If you feel the suppuration that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it in the Egyptian ointment.
Do this with no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see swelling in the ear, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
of the sheet of paper
This althule that comes on papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, it behooves you to extend them with pliers and tweezers, and the edge of a spatula from their roots; then put on their place powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorates, then cauterize with a fine lentil cautery, and the cauterization after the incision is worth moves; and many times they return, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
of the gristle
Many times come in papers the eyes some things that seem brittle in its form and in its hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "hail", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hail moves from one part and another, and this is a light thing to know; then make the large, then the scrape of each part lightly, then take it with pliers, and cut. If you cannot cut it without piercing a little the paper, so it grieves nothing to the sick; and if the fissure is great, so the assemble with a suture, and the cure until it is healed; and if it is small, so make no force, for the ointment restores it quickly and prevents flesh.
And if the hail is descending down into the ear towards the upper part, so turn the paper, and being the hail to pliers, and cut it and press from one side and another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the hail is cut, so leave the eye of salted water, and cure the place with that which prevents flesh until the sick be healed.
of the grease of the eyes
This is grease that is created in the webs of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and it grieves much their eyes, and they come the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces afterwards, and sleep on them, and are their papers under their eyebrows moist that the swelling and the appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press its place with your fingers and feel the exirnach between.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your shoulder; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exirnach from each part, then put it on top of him; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture with the sharp spatula a fissure of a width, and not be more than the wound made in the vein; and make the skin in length as far as you come to the exirnach; and in more places comes exirnach from the fissure, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract then a whole piece of cloth with your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the fissure, that you come to the entire spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind him.
And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the fissure, so accroi a little the fissure lightly until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then moisten bandages in aisil and in water, and put on top, and strain with bands.
And if it happens to such men who grind the herb and put on top to corrupt that moisture which is stayed. Then cure it until it is healed. And if it comes to the place a hot abscess, then cure with ointments soothing until it is healed.
of hairs of papers
When in papers hairs grow arranged other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes and bring many kinds of maladies as accustomed tears and softening of the papers and albuginea, as much as that is the cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine ague according to this that it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is made or by incision and stitch or by caines, according to that which I will say.
It behooves you to put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if this is not so, there puts an needle to all .i. thread above; and let it be below the margin of the paper or where the hair grows next to these hairs, and trace .i. thread upward to the entire paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the hairs arranged, to all the spatula cutting, from the large tear to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then reign above the paper a figure of an enche, as the leaf of myrtle, and however it behooves that the figure is according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if to that one who needs it, then cut a great quantity of the paper according to this that the paper is softened; then make at all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and begin from the large tear to the small one; and let be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then put the needle in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then scrape it completely; then assemble the .ij. lips with a stitch of a needle with all .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air to the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows to any glues things, if you want to do this; and if not, have no care about it, then leave the stitch and the threads up to .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without stitching with dry and constricting things, for the paper revives by the healing of the wound and the assembling of it, but the stitch is muddled (as the ancients said), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you draw the paper of a figure which is as the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at three inches wide according to the form which is here:
then cut that which rises above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you do not have power to hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has one thread, and put it in the middle of the figure; and put one other thread along the large tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have drawn, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then appease it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is necessary that you use those that we have said of the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of the splints is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to those that I have said, and then make .ij. splints by art, and .ij. subtle ligaments as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble the one and the other subtly on top of that which overhangs the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. splints of the .ij. parts form; and let it remain thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and wrinkle and carry itself, until it falls by itself.
If it tarries, if it is cut with more force, then the cure as long as it is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper is raised, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. splints that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The works is such that you prick a subtle needle, and put in it one thread of silk, soft and subtle; then assemble the heads and knot them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another thread of silk, finely braided, and knot the chief of the threads; then put the patient’s head on your healthy one; and let it be in the sun so that the work is clarified, for it is a subtle and fine work, then put the needle all the way into the chase in the root of the hair adjacent, and make it pierce in the paper carefully until you draw it from above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then extract your hand so that the hairs come out all the way into the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the opening above and you see it with the vision of your eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair is rooted in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hair is small, accompany it with one long hair from the natural ones, and let it be raised with that one or you leave it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
Of the rot of the eye
When this sickness which is called 'aleacrati' or rot comes in the eye, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.  And happens by suddenness of wound, or cutting, or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of operating in it is that you split the suture and separate its lips, and put inside tents of linen, and let it be until it is healed; and it is not fitting that you use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. For if you do this, then the sickness returns worse than at first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or althea and flaxseed are cooked, and the diaquilon ointment melted into any of the oils, and envelop a tent, and cure it with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not suture according to the form that it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but remedies for this sickness, that it may not return according to the form that it was before.
of the char that comes in the eye
This disease that is desoz which truly is called “axacrati”, and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wound and fissure and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an needle, in which there are .i. double thread, and stick it in the char, and make it go from the left tear to the right, so that the threads come in .ij. chiés of the char; then keep the char above the whole needle, and cut at .i. spatula wide.
And if the figure of the paper comes back according to what it ought, it is good; if those are not, then take .i. razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make .ij. fissures or cuts inside the paper; and let the chiés of the .ij. fissures be at the .ij. angles of the incision that you have cut, and make two angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has the name “."j. griesche"; then remove that char, according to the quantity that its costs are augmented below, from those who follow the paper, then adjust the .ij. parts separated, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure with what we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, as long as it is healed.
And if the ailment comes from a split or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you split a plain cut under the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then sever between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, because it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip everything with all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is necessary for the operation and instruments in more dispositions.
of the paper's
When this soldering happens to a man's eye in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move nor perform its natural workings, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and the being as pinches, until you cut what is attached to the spatula fine, which must not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient may not suffer that the spatula too sharp or bleaches the eye; and let your incision, with which you remove this assembly, be gentle, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and it is healed all of this assembly, and one does no time in the eye salty water, and the leavings of fresh water, and of coliere; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in the white of an egg; and after the third day use the coliere and the things soudans until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in two ways: it is nervouse and similar to one hard syfac, and another which is not nervouse, but is similar to white moisture congealed, that when one touches it with iron and one boils it panre as pinches, so one cannot; and the one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear, and crosses poc and poc until it covers all the view and all the light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and lift the paper with your hand, then coil the angle as pinches of small doubleure, and the rest upwards; then take a needle, and put on it one hair of horse, or of calf, or of ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a poc and put it in the angle, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the rest upwards, and scar the whole hair along the side of the angle which follows the prunele and silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with all the spatumile subtle and small forces, and leave the char natureil or tear, so that by the incision does not come the body of tears acostumeement; and no times is it ascended the angle only, and on the thread, as we have said; then the scar on all the spatumile souef of this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a bit of silk ground, and from the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure it as much as it needs until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put the needle in, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines; and it grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly pointed according to this form:
And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not lessen and the reason hastens, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red ochre and ground silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing is against you in the eye, like an abscess, then milk it, and treat the abscess first as hot as long as it is healed, then restart the work as before, as long as it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear hurts in the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it to the armpit and cut a part and not half altogether, so that no body of tears comes; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
of the flesh that arises on the iris
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the iris and restrains itself on the eyelids and turns them outward, and seems like a rose of bloom; and the work for this is that the patient puts his head in your health, then works the eyes, and coils all that flesh with suitable tweezers to this, and supports it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go cutting all the way down to the end, and keep yourself that you don't wound the eye during the work; and let the incision of the spatula be as we have said in the incision of the angle and small forces of which one removes the sebum, as how it demonstrates after this chapter the form;
and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply the oil of seal ground or distill there red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil boiled cotton with egg white, so that it may be sure of a hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the without cloth covering is mounted, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things soothing hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as long as flesh is attached in the eye by this manner.
But nevertheless it is necessary that you apply the cure of each weak oil by nature's way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member be suffering from this work.
of the veins of the eyes
Blood vessels are red that cover the eye, and take away from the view their work and weaken the eye all days. It is necessary then that you first look at the eye, in which it is, whether it is, or not, and there is no other illness besides the blood vessel; therefore, the coil in this manner: command to the patient that he put his head in your hand, then suspend those vessels on the whole line according to his wisdom, and let the lines be subtle double according to this form:
And let two lines by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then coil as forces those vessels subtly, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see remove those vessels out of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and make this work at the hour of midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those vessels; and when you will have done this, then distill in the eye collyrium green and red for to corrupt what is remained of the blood vessel.
And if you cannot gather all of these in that hour, make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and the abscess is sure to be hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The mire is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and with sharp medicine according to those that I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see the corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of this form; and it is called “sharp chief,” and it is made of iron one chief point, and it is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption is removed; and do this several times, then return the place to medicines drying.
If the wound is sewn and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is sewn together, and it remains so for forty days, and it does not renew and is not bad pus, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to its original opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the iron head be three angles, and the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here:
then put it on the bone below the tear duct, and move your hand from the eye i.e., 1 pock, then turn to the whole forest until it pierces the bone and he feels it through that which comes in this if he holds his hand on his nose; and then return the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the places, then go the matter to the nose; so is lighter thing for the patient.
from the issue of the eye
When the eyes are open fully and there is no disturbance in the nose or diminution, then you must bind the patient; then cleanse, then place suction cups or a leech without harming to suck, then place on the eye i. one linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and apply a plaster on it with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths soft enough, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye needs; then strain them from above with a hard bandage, and restart the suction cups to suck without harming; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then you must strain it a lot; then remove the linen after the day and the night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good; if not; then restart the plaster and cloths and the linen and suction cups until it is healed.
of the dislocation of wool
When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and there come forth fibers like .i. grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put a needle into the root of the lower part until the one above, then put another needle where there is .i. double thread from the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around it, and restrain it well, then extract the needle and put on top the oil-like half in abundance of an egg; and let it stay until the threads fall with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the grape each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from the oil, and correct the albuminous moisture and lower the eyes, and enter them immediately; then extract it as long as it is healed.
of the  bow of the eye
This illness which is called "alcunnati"  is nothing but the bow that is assembled in the eye, seeming like an arrow descending, and it is not a needle; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a .i. prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from .ij. parts, and move it as much as you see the bow coming up to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and be disordered the light, and the patient sees things as he used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is an arrow, and if the descent of the bow is not arranged as we have said. so make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make on the corneal cloth .i. point by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the corona, as much as the bow issues; and when it is issued, so distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured of other cure until it is healed.
of the needles of the eye
We have seen the appearances of needles in division, and what is necessary to perceive; so in work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light for the sun, and tie the healthy eye and hold it tightly; then put the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument that is called «almagda», or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the width of a thread in that white of the eye to the part of the less tear, then put the instrument called «almagda» skillfully, and return your hand as long as it pierces into the white of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path almagda be at the middle of the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black; and this is the cornea of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal tissue, and then put the instrument up to where the needle is, then express it from below one way after another. If the needle now descends, if the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest .i. little, and if the eye returns to the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensnared and it does not rise, extract almagda gently by turning your hand poc and poc; and then return in needle a pinch of silk gem, and leave from that the eye inside. Then put outside the eye plugged or bandage half dipped in rose oil and in abundance of egg white, and tie with the healthy eye.  We, and those who are of our time, put on top as a common broth with abundance of egg white.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, because there are some men who have their eyes too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called «alberit», of which this is the form:
And pierce therefore the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep in it, but make .i. it subtle, then put almond, as we have said; and at the completion of the work, equip the patient with .i. a pillow coming forward, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. a dark place; and be deprived of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition up to the third day; then untie it in that same dark house, and try his sight, and let him see some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not good that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align this, because the water rises quickly.
If the abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the address of this which soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then untie the sight and put on his face .i. an orilliet to cover any day, and be in that same dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and be converted in his affairs; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almond pierced, to which one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almonds, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of grain.
And let the head of these of this same subtlety, and the hind in three angles acute.
from the flesh from the nails
Sometimes nails grow joined together, diversely, because of which some seem like scorpions with many feet; and if there are such [nails] where the flesh is cracked of a bad color, and some have flesh of good color. In that one therefore of these nails which is sound, and not cracked, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and put the ointment on those nails, and rub them outwards; then cut what you are able to hold with a subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that this nail is entirely removed.
And if there remains anything that one cannot cover, then open it all, i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if without a sore or abscess, then support it as is fitting; and if it are malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize it until the blood is seared and all the pus is removed, then put on either oil or wine.
If the nose works and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as fittingly, know that there is raw flesh in the bone above, so that the instruments cannot come to cut; therefore it behooves you to put there i.e., a thread of linen a bit thick, and be bound by hands ours, and have between each knot a space i.e., an inch or less; and put the patient's head with the thread in his nose at its tip, and pull out gently until it comes through the nose inside the mouth; and many times do the children in school so, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and feel each after the other carefully as those who are or thread. Do this until you know that the threads have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this i.iij days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nose a patch of wool for some days until it is healthy, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, by which one distills the oils and medicines in the nose:
And let it be of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, as a basket, and lead it so; and if you see fit, make a closed basket, and let the instruments be full for cleansing the head; and have one handle at the top for holding it when heating oil or any liquid.
of the flesh upon the bone
Many times at the head of the bone a sickness arises which is called "telul", and grows and becomes great afterward, so much that it is a terrible sight to behold; and for this it is necessary that you cut it at the beginning, and pull out all the bone, then put upon its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays to cut it until it is great, beware if it is hard, of dark color, of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, because when one cuts it any time, there comes great evil to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touching, not of dark color, and you see that one can entirely cut it, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure its place with things drying and restraining.
When the bone is cut and sutured
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these work cartilages, it profits little, for in few men. It is therefore necessary that when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh in all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already severed on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips to a stitch, and restrain them, and powder upon powder of dragon blood, and incense ground; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other binding plaster, and let it stay until it falls off by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: or by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
of abscesses of the lips
In men's mouths happen within the lips abscess hard, seeming to grains of times, and lesser and greater; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and fends upon each one, and take with pincers and cut in each part; then apply there after the incision of vitriol ground, until the blood be stanched; and then the leave of this, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
of the flesh of gums
Many times flesh arises upon the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and leave to run the blood or serum; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
of the deaf
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellow and green, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is smelly; so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his cheeks be in your saint, and pull out the teeth or scabs appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do of the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other spots, until they are removed; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those no, then re-begin on the second day and the third, until you have pulled everything out; and know that teeth need various forms of instruments to pull out, according to what the work shows, because the razor with which one pulls out the teeth outside have other forms than those that are pulled between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you take care to drain as much as you can, because one should not do otherwise; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to pull it out. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you be certain about the tooth aching. Many times the pain of the patient deceives and thinks that it is a good tooth and pulls out the good tooth; and nevertheless the pain departs not by this, as long as the evil remains, because we have already seen this with our patients; and when you are well certain about the tooth aching, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in all its parts with a spatula strong to guard the gums from all sides; then move it with your pliers or fine tweezers at the first pit and pit, as long as it is well loosened, then firmly secure the pliers; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After extracting the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out, take any of these instruments and put them inside each part lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the holes are; and if you extract it subtly with pliers, that it does not break when extracting it; and it is necessary to work very wisely around the gum to loosen the tooth.
And then be careful that you do not break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not do as the ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and do not bring about what we have recounted; but they often bring about great illness by the lesion of those roots that remain, or by the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen. And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding comes out, which often happens, apply the place with vitriol powder; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, which one must first use the teeth, are to be long points and large handles, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and be toothed to hold well.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the tooth, it is necessary that you put on top of it cotton moistened in butter, one or two days, until the place is softened, then you put in the pliers which are called "algefri", because the head seems like a beak of care; and be inside made also like a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then it is necessary that you uncover the flesh around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because this is its form:
And be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with these, it is good; if these do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
and other iron instruments which are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
And this instrument should not be able to break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the illness show them, because there are such diseases where the old ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one does not break the bone or the other bones, or where it is possible, then seek the instruments that are necessary, as I have said, and help with gestures, this is the form: And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable to this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, so the king has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file or polish it; therefore, the chisel; and if it is next to the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to 1 small beak, and be of sharp iron at its tip:
And the cope little by little in hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, if the file of a certain form like this is.
and it is also like the file used to make needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in hands for days lightly, so that it does not move until it is finished; then the plane at the end with no scratch, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, then it is necessary to file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue nor corrupt speech.
when the tooth aches
When the tooth in front moves forward, or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press so that it moves unless it falls out, and you have cured them with medicines constricting, and this does not work; if it is necessary to restrict it with a gold wire, because the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but the gold never changes; and be the wire moderate nor too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see to tighten the teeth, so take the wire and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the diseased teeth, if there is one or more, as long as you come skillfully up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin the covering up to the place where you began, and pull your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the ends of the wire with pliers, and assemble them, and put them between the healthy tooth, and place it so that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it unties, or the wire breaks, then bind it with another wire; let it remain and serve thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the tightening of the two healthy teeth, and the two diseased ones, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, so it is put back in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and suffering, and at some time the form of a tooth of bone of beechwood is made, and it is put in the place where the deficiency is, and it is restricted as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
At no time is this ligament that comes from below the tongue or nature, that one is born thus; or by accident of a suture wound; and the work is such that you operate on the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue. Then cut the nervous ligament wide, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place; and if there is hardness or something else, and this is from the closure of a wound, then put the awl and cut wide that ligament; and guard that the incision be not too deep, for the artery which is below. And when you have done so, raise the cloth of rose water and of asil, or of cold water; then put under the tongue a tent of linen; and tie the sick person's head each night, that the place may not close together. And if bleeding occurs, then put on the place vitriol ground; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentil cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And if you see it of rusty color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards whiteness, and there is moisture, then put down the awl, and cut it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other. And if the blood does not stop at your work, then put on top ground vitriol until it is stained, then return to your work as long as you extract everything; then raise the cloth of rose water and of seil, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
At times, boils come from within the throat which are called “godath,” and they properly call them the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, then be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small size and with a dull color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and its root is large, do not touch it with iron, also to avoid the loss of blood; but leave it until it is dead, and afterwards you will cut it open, or it would burst by itself; and if it is of a whitish color, and the root is subtle, have your instrument ready to cover, but first look if the abscess is cold, resting and calmed. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his cheeks be on your side, and open the mouth and take the serjans between your hands, and press the tongue down under the entire instrument, from this comes the form; and let it be of silver or of iron as subtle as a knife:
And you press the tongue down onto this entire instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the needle and put it into the almond, and pull upwards as much as you can; and pull nothing else from the tissues with it, then cut with the instrument, from this comes the form that resembles a force; and nevertheless the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or of steel:
And if you don't have this instrument present, then cut with tongs, from this comes the form:
And be trenchant on one side, and on the other side no; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and thus, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then cure it until it is healed; and no time arise in the throat other abscesses than the two almonds, so cut them as the two almonds, always.
And I medicated a woman from an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of small size; and I had very well closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not expire through the conduit which was obstructed, and could not eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained so one day or two. And the abscess was so raised that it had been put two fingers by the two openings of birth. I therefore immediately, and tied in one a needle, then pulled out the trail, and in a large portion of bowel; then refit another piece in the other opening of birth, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after tying the needle in these abscesses, and cut a part, and there came out only a little blood; and thus was unstopped the conduit of the throat of the woman, and began now to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I engaged it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remained without growing; and I left these parts, and know only that God did with her after me.
of the grape
When the grape is ripe and it is long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is very large and round, it is called "grape". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the poultice of the abscess has been calmed, and it is thinner, then it is necessary for you to cut it; and the one that is round assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a reddish color or black, then it is necessary for you to make the incision of it. For there is great peril on the patient. It is therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument which we have spoken of before; then insert the needle into the grape, and remove it as little, and cut it at one or two instruments which I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity which is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves to the voice, and to speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to be cut, then it is necessary for you to use him an ointment at the cauterization of the sense of fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp.
And put on his head a hair or where one puts the medicine, as the handle of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine above the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscle run from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the windpipe; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it onto the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it burning and the bite of the medicine is calmed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton into the channel above, until the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you need to recommence the cauterization of the medicine, commence it again, and after the cauterization, wipe around the grape, with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be raised with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, nor cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and put it inside, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot have one instrument shaped according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and let one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person until the vapor rises to the uvula by the cane, so that the uvula is mortified; after this do often, until the uvula dries, and guard that you don't do this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and don’t make this unless it is at the declination of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a cane and put inside its head a piece of egg, so that the mouth of the sick person doesn't have too much heat; because the piece of egg does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether safe.
Many times it is lodged in the throat a bone or spine of fish, or any thing; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behooves you to make the sick person vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it will draw out the thing dry by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will lodge itself, and then you will draw it out further; and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take one instrument of plumwood according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and have the head high raised; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come to naught, nor thrust in the bone; and move it is better that the patient thrusts the instrument, for he will know whether or not the thing is harsh; so thrust down, or draw it forth with all the instrument equally, as long as it be forth.
of the bleeding of the throat
At no time is the bleeding of the throat treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sun, after you have pressed his tongue with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the bleeding, so treat it with all .i. a small pin, or with delicate forceps that are good for this. And if that does not work, take a  sheathed chain, and put it into the throat of the patient, then thrust in one end of the chain .i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient remains feverish all day. Then take a full .i. cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the bleeding feels the water, so it will stop.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have spoken of in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will surely fall. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take one pot where there are burning coals, and let the bottom be covered with a veil pierced in the middle, and in this pierce the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes up to the throat; and the throat will now tighten, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and give him salty and other foul things to eat, and let him drink no water; and then the necessity that it goes out by this government.
And the form of the instrument with which one treats the throat is, when it can be seen, like tongs curved so that they can enter into the throat; and it has the semblance of a bird's beak, and it has an asperity of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
The chapters on abscesses
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after from one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in .ij. manners that one is in its same semblance, and from those which it holds moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body, because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those which come in joints, and each one has its judgment in the work.
And if abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the boil is mature according to its fulfillment; and if there are some that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their fulfillment, such as abscesses which are near joints. Because when abscess comes near joints, and one lets it be until it is rotten inside, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, for this reason it causes contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the piercing until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, pierce it thus when it is mature; and it is not fitting that you pierce an abscess ripe without complete digestion fulfilled, except for the one which is near the foundation, lest it be perforated too deeply, and become elongated inside, and there comes a fistula; and be unable to heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is mature according to its fulfillment, and that is when the pain is appeased, and the part of the fever diminished, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the shaking and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where the most dependent part of the abscess is, and where it appears to bulge; and be the piercing long in the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their places equally where there is no crease.
In these that suppurate, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is as good as you let the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion accomplished, as we have said. Because if you pierce it before then, it will lengthen the body of the pus from it, and it is full of much dirt; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of it. And to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member has need of. And it is necessary that you bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many cleavages according to the semblance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to sever the core, and cover; when it is become as one drapel, and is dead, then it is necessary to do as is done to buboes: and if there are any that are cut in three angles, and if there are any that are covered like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of anger; and if there are any where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and semblance cuts.
Those who have no chief, as a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, then do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then drain nothing straight away; do this many times, little by little, until all the pus is gone. Similarly if the patient is of weak strength, or woman with child, or small children, or old men decrepit. Because the spirit trembles sometimes with the exit of the pus, that by chance he might die the patient, and you are not responsible for it. So avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, bring in tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then it is necessary that you put in each one a tent so that it comes one against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it inside out, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or shaving of linen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then untie it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold water and apply it, and moisten one drapel, and put it on the place where blood is flowing many times. And if the bleeding persists, then bring government and cure, and the powders that I have said in hand here in this book, and if it is in winter, and the place where the abscess is is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put on tents and drapelz moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put on drapelz moistened in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and clean it, and cure it, as is fitting, until it is healed.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of sores
Of sores
And the incision on a pus-filled abscess and moist one, it is lighter because they are of little blood. And if in some of these abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and of these I had seen .i. abscesses that was a chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had made any incision on it, one would have done as well to him a wound like a stone. In other abscesses coming or chiefs, whether those that come at the chiefs of children and at the roots of ears, the opening must be always at the lowest point, so that the pus may issue easily; and the cure as it is fitting.
of scrofulous sores
Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come somewhere else or on the body, and are very bad, and are joined together with one another. And each scrofulous sore is properly within its own side, as the others and the abscess of the chief, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofulous sores are many. There are some that contain moisture, and some that are malignant who will not obey health. In the one therefore that you see of good disposition to touch, and is similar in color to the body, and mute on every side and is not at all close to the nerves of the neck or to the artery or to the vein, and is not very deep; then it behooves you to open it from above, and to make a cut of each part, and to put apart the two lips of the wound as in the abscesses of the chief, if you have need of it, as we have said. And treat little by little, and be sure that you do not open the nerve or the vein, and let the spatula be gentle and make no trenches, so that the hand does not slip, and look too far ahead, that you may not open what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery and it does not let you work, so put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and constrain the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then inquire with your index finger if there remain any small pustules, if you cut them and cleanse them. And if in the root of the pustule a vein is large, so it does not behoove you to cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it hanging by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound of old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
And if you cut the whole pustule, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then when there is no more superfluity for the size of the pustule. It is necessary that you intend to cut the root of it, and draw pus, and sew it as we have said. Those pustules that hold superfluity, pierce where it opens more; and pierce it as before mentioned, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, cure it with ointment causing flesh, until it is healed.
of scabies
The ancients said and spoke of cutting open the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is the writing of their word.
For those who have squint, it is necessary that the slit in the throat called "epiglottis" be cut open; and do not help them because all veins and the pores of the sick are hot at these who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat or in 2. almonds. When the sickness is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is therefore necessary, when we want to cut the epiglottis, that we cut it below 3 or 4 circles with a small slit through the middle, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage.
and those that are such are agreeable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long of length.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to the whole neck, then cut the keel until it comes to the channel; and shun the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the neck that flows out from the place which is broken, and by the lack of voice.
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed for which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them together alone against the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this juice until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect is in the lung. Therefore, one cuts the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death.
And for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and care for it, until it was healed.
and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took one knife, and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe;
and I was called by her to heal her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and well that it had not yet cut a vein nor led further than the throat, and the veins were thereby brought out through the wound.
I bandaged it, and thus I closed the wound, and I treated it until it was healed;
and nothing more happened to the young woman except that she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition;
for this reason I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large abscess in the color of a wound, and it is much in women;
and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; the natural has no cause.
And the accidental is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; and there is fear, and it does not behoove to work to do fierce than in the one that is small, and prove and seek at all the intruder. if you find him also like our fat, and cannot at any vein, if the cut, as we cut the ours, and the tail to all its hair, if there is any of it. and encircle well soon, and the cure as it behoves, until it be perfectly healed.
of ours
Many ways there are to us, of which I will say all the appearances;
and therefore it is necessary that I say all the difference that is between us and them.
I say that a lesion is sometimes feverish and hot, as long as the boiling has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; therefore rest the fever and the heat.
With us there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains one tumor, which is its own sac, and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a swelling, and becomes large;
and are according to two kinds, or dry, or moist, and very colored as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire into all the instrument which is called "entromissoire," according to what its form will be or chapter which comes after.
And the manner of inquiring into abscesses is that you prick or moisten the place you find in the abscess and turn your two points and points until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then that it be according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in those who jump for it.
If moisture runs short, whatever color it has, treat it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the cautery moisture comes back, know that it is fat, so treat it in a cross shape, and take it with tweezers, and gently scrape it on each side and cover the patch where it lies so you pull it out healthy with the needle.
And if you cannot pull it out healthy, then remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times.
and if it remains for a while, and the wound pains him, apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and restrain the wound, and put on top soothing things of an abscess hot, and care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with those things that cause flesh to grow.
and if the vein is too weak or otherwise you are in haste and apply the place of crushed vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound purges, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to covering those that remain from the new.
See here the forms of the instruments for introduction, and they are of three manners: large and medium and small; and there are three squares that are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three manners: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses or fistulas.
And they are also like the needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are of citrine iron, or silver, and the yellow ones are worth more, and they are more tested in black pitch to encircle the borders of fistula.
And they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and so there are probes that have two borders of three manners also;
And so there are probes that have three borders, and they are also of three manners; and so there are probes that have two borders, and probes of a single border only, and they are of three manners; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these are those one makes cuts with, and there are some that do not cut more than from one side, which we scrape the nerves, for which reason one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
And of these introducers are the spatulas put in handles so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses.
and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and one should not use them anywhere other than in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and under the armpits, and similar places;
And sometimes one makes i.e. another instrument small, resembling the scrapes of fistulas, according to this form, for which one staunch blood
And one puts it sometimes in the place which is healthy to cut veins, and arteries, and sometimes around according to this great form:
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like breasts of a woman;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should be according to this form of these lines from b. up to g.: Then scrape the fat, and apply the wound with medicine preventing flesh, then bring together the .ij. lips of the wound to suture, and care for it until it is healed
And if the breast is lined down and softened for its size as it happens to women, then make two cuts above on two ribs, by two similar incisions; So that one is held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g.; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of sutures and powders, and what is necessary in the care, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of blood flow, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining and the grease, then treat it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous lumps or boils which contain moisture.
Therefore those who contain moisture it is necessary that they be cut according to this form, from the line b. until the line .g.: And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care with ointment after this as long as it is healing.
And if the abscess is similar to a boil, then treat it as we have said for cutting boils, and if the wound returns pus, then administer cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is cut, and the skin that is above is sewn together, then it often comes to abscesses, and just as well it happens at the vein swollen and abscess.
And if the one who knows this is about the artery, then are the abscesses long from it being made. And when you feel it in your hand, that is to say, it's a tightening; and when this is about the vein, then there are signs of blood being pulled out.
And it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the armpits and arms and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of iron, and in that which is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in that which is swollen of artery making from above the long skin;
It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of iron, and in that which is at the head it is also necessary to avoid, and in that which is swollen of artery making from above the long skin; then operate the waist as one incisions, and departs beautifully the artery of the cloths, as long as it is uncovered.
then put underneath it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in 2 lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the 2 arteries which are in the temples;
then point the place which is between the 2 links with an introducer as long as the blood which is there comes out, and be careful to the abscess;
then administer the cure that engenders a bow, as long as the ligature holds; Then cure those who are anointed with this, as long as it is healthy;
And if the abscess is about the size of the vein, then it behooves you to hold with your hand that which you can of the abscess to all the skin; Then thrust the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and let there be .i. double thread, so that you draw it from the other side; Then close the abscess, as I told you, or bind one of the two parts to two shoulder with thread.
And if you doubt that the thread is not firm, reinsert another needle through all the thread beneath the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
Then cut the abscess until the superfluities issue forth, then cut away the superfluity of the core and leave what is bound.
Then place on one cloth moistened in wine and oil, then administer cures of compresses and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses come in the nerves when they are injured, or from too much work, and similar things.
And these happen more often in the shoulders and hips, and in all places where there are joints, and these are very painful abscesses, and their color resembles the color of the flesh, and is in more positions without pain.
And when it is pressed, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the flesh, but under the heart.
and keep it still from all sides, and do not go forward or backward, or down or up, and the one who is in joints should not be covered by iron: for fear it would contract.
And he who is on the head or forehead, make the skin with the spatula. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, then suspend it with a cord and peel it, then remove the pus and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed.
Of large boils hanging At no time occurs in the bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its likeness to fungus, and it has subtle roots and the head large; and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a fine root, and they were slightly split, and pus came out of them.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6. And the work of the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul (likely referring to a boil or inflamed tissue) is white and moist and with a fine root;
If the cut is on a wide spatula, and are in your presence the cautery of fire. For in the cutting comes many times too great outpouring of blood, and if without you it is vain, then hurry therefore to cauterize;
And if you see the patient is frightened and afraid of the incision of iron, then take one thread of fleece well made, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease to restrain the thread of fleece until it heals the joint, and ceases by itself without labor; and if the roots are large, then have fear to cut even for the belly, but you may well cut half
Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep that you do not cover the pellicle which is of fox color and of poor sense and of milk regard.
For it is an ulcerated abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers after this.
When the boil has festered
If the appearance of the boil comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure of the  syphax, and it is on the belly and has some boils, as they have in other ruptures, or of blood that bursts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from flatulence;
and if it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open from different exits. And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it at its two sides it rises up, and then returns, and perhaps it is constricted, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses are thick and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity;
and if it is due to windiness, so is the breath at touching, and the works are that you look if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. So it is necessary that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if its appearance is for the intestine or the belly, then it is necessary that you command the patient to keep his arm, and be stretched straight, then seize around the bulge. then command him to  move softly between your hands, then go around the place you have marked with all the spatula. then stretch the half of the abscess upwards to the entire big incision;
then operate on the half of the abscess extended onto the linen, and put your index finger in it, and search for the intestine; If you find it caught in the ligament, then untie it, and put the intestine to the outside of the belly;
And if you find the boil, then take it at its edge, and cut away the excess;
And if the artery makes it contrary, or the vein, then go well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads of silk, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you make them pierce;
Then restrain the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave them there until it rots, and let the dead flesh fall by itself; or you cut it when it is subtle and swollen, then treat it as is necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said;
or you cut it when it is subtle and swollen, then treat it as is necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as is necessary, and close the place.
for the ulcer
We have said in the division the appearances of ulcers, and how one must work on them with medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that the ulcer is generated in the marsh, and great caution should be exercised in its treatment, and the ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the armpit, and in the groin, and similar places, then one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not fitting that you approach it, for I have never healed any, nor has anyone healed any before me.
And the works, when it is in place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge at any time the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then prepare the patient i.e. good place to make the work; then get your tweezers or chancre, and the hair on all sides, and the bone on all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow out completely, and compress the place with your hand or any thing, and if the bleeding goes against you of the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding is extinguished; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: so it is only; and one should not touch iron in these two resemblances: namely, tympanites and hydropericardium, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy which is called “eclytes” with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, consider if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and solution of the belly and similar things; if one does not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: Lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly by pushing the water to the lowest part of the pelvis, then take the spinal spatula according to this form: And be sharp in .ij. parts at the point, and all ways do not be so much that it can come to the intestine when you put it in, and do not let it pierce;
then look if the dropsy is increased towards the intestines: then it is necessary that you cut into below the belly .iij. fingers straight above the nipple; and if the dropsy is by the disease of the liver, so be your incision to the left of the belly .iij. fingers; and if it is by the spleen, so be it to the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lies on the incision so that the superfluities do not run into the weak place;
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push it out, and lift your hand to the spatula entirely between the skin and the syfac as much as when scraping at the quantity of a nail or in which enters; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the place eight, and this is the place of the water, then draw the water out, and push out this instrument from where it is, and it is like the form: And it is similar to a subtle silver chain, and it is made of arrain or archaut lighter, and in the part below .i. small opening; and on one side, .iij. openings; and .ij. on the other side, and .i. on the other; and the head is tapered like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the pen:
At the head above is the ailment, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now upon the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, for if you empty more than it befits in that hour, by chance the patient may die because of the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death.
But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick person signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now by the heart which stops the opening that is on the syfac, because of what I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument again the other day, if you see the patient suffering those, and treat of the water a small quantity;
Do this none day, and guard yourself from letting too much water drain until there remains but a little bit of water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you let him too much water, cure him with burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and let him stay drinking; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stoppage of the penis At no time are children born who do not have a hole in the penis, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If it happens so soon that it cannot perceive at all one spatula very fine according to this form: then put on the hole one clo subtle of lead, and tie it and hold it thus for three or four days and when he wants to make urine, let the closure be removed, and make urine, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose hole is small, if they are medicated with the lead clo as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the hole in its place are blue because none are born who have the hole at the head of the penis, for which reason they cannot urinate before they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, and are the head of the rod and the cup as well as the waist of a pen, so that the pierced one falls in the middle, as it should; and guard against bleeding that comes many times, and if it happens, with the sponge of those who sponge blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the pimples on the rod Many times these blemishes come in the rod, and it is a foul appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to prick them with one subtle needle, and scrape and cleanse them all, then put upon cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diaficon ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess is bad, of bad color and afterwards, then it is necessary that you bring it cautery. When you have cauterized it, and if the abscess is in its entirety on the edge, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it is necessary that you remove the abscess which is inside first; and when it is united, cure the one outside. Because when you cure it altogether, it is not at all assured the joint of the edge that it will not be pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in its edge and where the opening is; therefore it is necessary to shave away all that which is black and corrupted, then place on top the ointment of honey and flour which is made of apple tree bark and vetiver, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help two situations together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption; and if the joint of the edge is corrupted and retracts, it is necessary that you put or conduct from the edge a chain of plank, and piss the patient among; and when the skin is raised at the head of the edge which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one instrument shaved, until the ties are loosened, and the joint of the edge is delivered from all sides.
And if it is a grievous thing to devise these, then it is necessary that you scrape it with one spatula from the head of the edge and of the skin; then sever carefully between two, and place there one subtle drape of linen soaked in cold water, so that it does not raise.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not a wound of continuous bleeding like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest to salvation.
I say that the ancients did not say circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have wanted the most part of the masters and healers who performed circumcision around i.e., in one dal, and with force, and a whole new knife; so it was the worse for them because there are two cloths, and by chance if one cuts the top and leaves the bottom one.
Or the wound should be covered, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is done by the dal' it isn't assured the point of the member; and in the purification of the knee, by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they are born as if they don't have need of purification and I have wanted.
From the purification which is done with force to all of the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut well just as much above as below.
For when you press your hand, if it cuts equally in one thing all of the soul tenses; but that the thread is well is twisted around the skin; and be the manner of the first work so that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only force him to tie the thread around the rod just so much, and then let it be joyful in all ways that you can. then make it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the handle and blow or heart, and pull it up until the head of the handle is in; then cleanse it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below .i. pock at .i. other lien; and hold it as .ij. days by the second lienure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the .ij. liens, then lift the heart above gently and pull the head of the handle;
then make it be between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the handle and blow or heart, and pull it up until the head of the handle is in; then cleanse it well of the filth that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below .i. pock at .i. other lien; and hold it as .ij. days by the second lienure to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the .ij. liens, then lift the heart above gently and pull the head of the handle; then let it correct the blood pock and pock, because it is the muedres; and put powder on and on the powder .i. drapeil glued with a yolk of an egg cooked destempreit'd rose water, confited with rose oil well and fresh, and let it remain until the next day, and cure of another cure as long as it is sanez.
The form of the forces at the cleansing is this: the two heads should be held and should be sharp, and the heads are also as large as the hand equally:
The error of the purification is when the kerchief inside is at the incision; therefore it behooves you to extend it to your finger so that the leaf makes an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take tenaculum and then cut.
And if they are three days and what is below the shaft is swollen, then let it be until the abscess has calmed, and lightly exfoliate it; then cut it as much as you can, and guard yourself from the part of the shaft, it will not harm him at all.
Cure then the wound of things suddenly with powder, which we have said or treated of powders, and if you cut the kerchief excessively, and it goes upward, it will not harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to an obstruction of the stone, or blood congealed, or bowel, or flesh tumor, or similar things that we have said in the division;
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the urethra or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and have their feet placed on their back, and extend their belly from the upper part towards the back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as possible; and therefore the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released;
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe," of which this is the form: and it should be finely crafted silver, light as a bird's feather; and the handle should be one palm long and a half, and should be fine at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie to the head one pock of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of an egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water tempered;
then gently put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis above towards the bottom; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and the patient feels it coming up to the void thing, and this is not done according to this order unless for those who guide or where it goes is twisted; then be the thread all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and do correct the urine;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of the bladder diseases
When sores or blood come in the bladder, or there is assembled rot, and you see it distill with sharp and medicines, so do to all the instrument which is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the tubes should be such that the medicine stops well the penis without addition, so that if one can draw out the moisture, and expel it when necessary;
and when you want to administer your medicines into the bladder, put the chief tube of the catheter in the moisture, and pull on the inner string; so that you will draw out the moisture into the catheter, and then push firmly the inner string back in; so that the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
And this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one clysters the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of brass, and the head is higher up; and below at one side or where the shoulder joint falls; then take a sheep bladder and put in it the moisture with which you wish to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts forming a double strong thread, and heat one pot of that moisture on the fire; then insert the head of the clyster into the urethra, then strain your hand on the bladder throughout the entire movement of the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dial, and put inside that which you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hare-like, and causes the patient pain in his penis, and he thrusts many times, and then finishes; and after much of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they have 4 years, and it is very grievous in old men, and is as medium to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones, than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the phlegm which is in the intestines. For it often hinders the searching for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and push them out and move them down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes rises from its high place; then have him sit between your hands carefully, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely declining downwards; then the groin and touch it inside.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall to the touch of all, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is a grown man; and put it into its foundation, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, push it toward the neck of the bladder; then press upon your finger, and push it out to where you see to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him that he extend his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin which is below the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; then put the spatula cutting, of this it is the form:
And make between those who are between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but on the side of the left hip; and be straight above the stone, and your two sides be either the foundation, and be the waist through the traverse so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large;
By adventure the press so the two sides that are either foundation, that it leaps outside without work; and know that there is such stone which has angles, and margins: if it is grieved to issue; and if there is one that is below, seeming like a glint, and rounded, whose exit is light.
To that one therefore where it has angles and margin, make the waist larger; and if it does not leap, it is necessary that you extract on the tongs which are as a file at the head, so that to move extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put below the .i. subtle instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, enlarge .i. pock the pierced, and if it is without decor, then strain the vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull out the tract, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, it must be sliced, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through where the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless force yourself to drain it, or to break it with tweezers, as long as you pull it out in pieces
and when you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, and bind it, and put a damp cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then support the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you unbind it, wash the place well with oil and water, then treat it with diaphania ointment and basil oil, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and blood clots in the bladder, and because of that urine is retained, which is known in such a way that without leaping with the urine: therefore you should pour it into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn it;
then raise the wound of  acute and easy and from silk, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it behooves that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where it is conducted from the shaft, and tied within, and urine cannot issue; so cure of this that I say also, that you cut it many times, it is excused from cutting through this cure. I have already proven this.
Take one piece of iron in this form and be it at three angles, fastened into one piece:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the piece of iron into the shaft gently, until it comes to the stone; and turn the piece of iron in your hand at the stone, point by point, as long as you can feel the stone on the other side; thus soon will the urine come, then press your hand upon what remains of the stone that is inside the shaft. Thus soon it is broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the shaft straight to the stone between the two threads, then extract it outward, and untie the threads, and cleanse the coagulated blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stone of women
It happens that stone is engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, it is the cure grievous, and is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is one cannot find a woman well knowing who undresses herself to the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is so much deeper than the stone of the man, for which it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and great fear there is.
And if necessity demands it, then it is necessary that you take a midwife well knowing, and at pains find one, and if you do not find one, point so much as one chaste mirror subtil; and present her a bail well knowing in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to do what you command her of the incision of the stone;
And look very well if the woman is a virgin: then she must push her buttock or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she must constrain it below her buttock, and she recommends that she push her buttock or on the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it appears swollen and feels the stone in that part; and do not move her buttock above the stone or below, and be the first incision small.
Then push the root into the buttock, if you feel the stone so close to the wound until the stone can possibly be brought out, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins. If you know these similarities to know the outcome.
And if the stone doesn't come out, put ground vitriol in its place, and hold it for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is loose, and have the instruments that I told you about for extracting stones from men to help you in your work.
And if the stone doesn't come out, and it is an artery that is cut, put the powder on the place and bind it with bandages, and do not re-begin this work, and leave the stone and do not touch it, lest the patient die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the parts are healed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is loose.
Of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is under the heart of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and at times it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e. another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have this point no.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
And at times it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colours: or it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more;
and these are the signs to know this assembly, because if it is or white as we have said, so is the abscess re-joined, that is to say long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the sides, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, then is the abscess re-joined with a part of the egg, and for that reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the sides and the white as such, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you must probe the whole introducer quarrell, for its form is before this. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is within.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is within. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the fullness of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing slightly high, and put underneath him many blankets;
then sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart from the sides;
then take the spoon-shaped instrument, and cut the skin of the sides among them from their length up to near the armpit, and let your incision be completely straight when dividing the skin of the sides up to the white bone, and peel it carefully according to your strength;
Then pierce the  syphons plain with water to one inch wide opening, and draw out all the water, and then put your bandages, and hold the syphon upwards; and do not touch the heart of the coions, but only the syphon; cut all or in pieces equally the rib of him subtly, that if you do not cut it well wisely, it will return the water.
And if the leaf has fallen during your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the syphon; then assemble the two leaves of the heart of the coions with one suture, and then cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the leaf corrupted by another illness, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the outflow of blood; then cut the coion at all the suspensory, and draw out the leaf, and cure it as we have said.
And if the point is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part just as you did the first evenly, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound linen moistened with rose oil;
and put outside another linen moistened with wine and oil, and put on top the two pads, and put above cloth doubled, and tie it up over all the linen that is according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and put them in the shape of this lamb's wool according to this resemblance and be assembled by stitching at the groin of the breeches, and one of the arms presses on the foundation up to the back, and the other to the part of the armpit; and the other two from the head on top of the two arms, and let the whole restraint be assembled in the buckle of the breeches;
and sometimes this branch of cautery is medicated in place of an iron knife, and it is that you take i. a subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the water is uncovered;
if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and scrape it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more saved; and moves guarding against hemorrhage, and measures than the works of a knife;
And if no other thing makes you contrary, or abscess or running of blood or other thing, so cure that which makes you contrary, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, so administer perforation as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that watery root is there,
so make the patient sit on .i.  high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to all the spatula wide, and put the perforation long through the body; and let the openings be wide so that all the water flows out;
then put cotton on the place and bind it, and let the rest of the water flow out, then cure it until the wound is healed.
and if the white cloth does not let the water exit from the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you pour into it a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of the hydrophics, of which form is above; and enlarge .i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after .vj. months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and so will pass the days of the patient.
of the abscesses of the buttocks
Know that in the section of this root there is fear in more dispositions, for which it seems to me that one better leaves it.
And I will tell you the work and resemblances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the genitals; and it is by many causes.
That is to say by excess of sour and acrid humors, which are spread to the genitals, or by percussion;
And is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and does not find any pain, and is a serious abscess;
And by chance some abscesses are fearful and piercing and of a bad colour, and sometimes comes from the inside of an artery or from an inflammation of a vein.
When it is from an artery, then it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it is not proper that you touch it.
The one which is made from an inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression with the touch of the fingers.
and one can well do the sizing on this likeness, and on the other parts; and it is that you cut the heart of the testicles, then being the ewe on high, and the shaft further from the white skin, and deliver the suspensory from all parts of the ewe.
If the ewe is already joined with these new parts, then it behooves you to pull out the ewe, and cut it;
and if it is in the skin, or in those things that are within the vessels, then it behooves you to deliver all of that membrane, and cut it around completely.
And if the birth of the cartilage is or its back, it behooves you to cut it all and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when your works are accomplished, then apply the wound of wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the genitals
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling that of a boar's skin, with the softening of the genitals and the patient moves grievously when he goes
and the cure of this disease is as well prescribed as frighteningly as this one before.
and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one raised seat, then put the suspensory of the groin low to their two thighs, To all the vessels that are near the penis, and the masters braid them, and they stretch them out.
Then cut with a sharp trowel wide through the vessels, until they are uncovered.
And then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
Then put a needle where there is one thread doubled, and tie it to the first place where the vein came from, and tie it straight to the other end. Then cut the flesh in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted humors.
Then cure the wound as with the others where one avoids a bulge, so that no vessel flows that nourish one of the sides;
for by those nothing comes from evil, and if all the vessels come alive, then it is necessary to draw the sides towards all the vessels. so that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dries out and cannot be aided.
of the rupture of the shoulder The happenings of this damage are by the section that comes or shoulder, or the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners
and this rupture is either in the shoulder or of the extension of it, and come these 2 manners of much from causes: either by percussion, or jump, or by thrust, or by lifting heavy loads, and by similar things
and the signs when this is of the extension of the shoulder, are that there is poke and poke, in long lengths, and does not come suddenly And the abscess is even up to the shaft because the syphac tightens around the intestine.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the syphac that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscess appears diverse, under the skin close, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the syphac.
And sometimes the intestines are caught with it, and are held in, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, even when pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, therefore it behooves one to avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to draw the intestine into his hand within the wound, if it can enter. then either hold it on his neck between your hands, and raise his hips.
then stretch the heart upward, and cut all the skin of the scrotum long; then put within the folds of the loin two needles according to what you need to open the wound, and so that it can pass through;
Then peel away the skin that is beneath the skin of the groin, until the white fat is uncovered on all sides.
Then put your index finger into that which follows the groin, in that which is between the white fat that is beneath the skin of the testicle, and between the second fat.
And depart that which is behind the testicle, and between the second fat; and then move with your right hand into the core of the groin, and having the white fat on top to your left hand, and lift the testicle toward the waist. And command the minister that he extends the testicle upward, and unties that which is behind the ligament.
and if there is a point of the intestine wrapped or white as hard, and if you find no such thing, put it into the belly below.
then take a needle or one thick thread made of ten threads, and put it into the back part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong ligature of two parts; then wrap the threads around the hairs, and tie them formed of two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, except for an abscess which may come there; and place the rope straight according to the first rope long two of that one, and after those two ropes leave the remaining length which is under the curve of the shoulders the width of one finger.
and after that all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the shoulders as long as it does not touch the bone, and the bone, as we have said before;
then administer wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and put back the rope that we have said. And never once is the white part of the face (the shoulder) that we have said cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood loss.
For this happens many times, and leave the wound as long as it bleeds through it; and if it delays in healing, then be it raised with hot water, and put upon it what we have said, until it heals.
Then cure the wound with other cures, as long as it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this branch, I never saw anyone who dared to do the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like the root which is attached to the vis, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below;
then cut it in half, and cure the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels flow; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and open them; and do not let any of the intestines fall out at the anus, and if any do fall out, it is bad, and repair it immediately;
and nevertheless if it remains too long in this position, the wound or fistula grows larger, as long as the intestine protrudes;
and this happens by the extension of the sinew which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is stretched, then softened and swollen its places and open;
and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with a width according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the sinew which is below the skin that follows it, then take the iron and place it on the open place of the sinew;
and he presses on the front of the belly, then sews the two appearing eyes of the fig on the top of the thigh, and sews one and the other.
then he removes the top of the thigh, and does not cut of the fig nor extend anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the root of the intestines;
then he cures it by the cure of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if he cleanses and cures the wound, until it is healed.
The fig is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times is softened the skin of the testicles in certain men, because those which are inside are softened, and it is made to be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and one cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then assemble the two lips with a suture, and if you see, first suture the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure as the other wounds, until it is healed, and throw away the thread.
of the tightening
Know that tightening is common in our law, and for this reason I would like that I do not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two manners: one of which is that the wise men know how to answer when they are asked, and know the cure; and the other because we often need tightening of some beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other beasts. I say therefore that tightening is done according to two manners: either by attraction or by cutting. In the one that we do by attraction, we make our sit the beast in hot water until the testicles are softened and pliable; then taking them in your hand, as long as they are put back and you no longer feel them.  Of the tightening of size: it is necessary that you hold the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut on each testicle one cut, when you have well scratched them; and leave no prick of the syfac and the subtle syfac which is on the vessels; and this manner of tightening is more mature than the one that is done by attraction, because at the attraction by chance nothing remains of the testicles, by which the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
Of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: the one if between the two sexes it appears also as the figure of nature of a woman, where he has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and has on the pubis also like a penis and two sexes. And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the charted parts altogether, and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
Of the tenting
Tenting is a charted growth on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. It behooves you to shave the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and don't go too deep, lest bleeding comes from it, then cure it with another cure until it is healed; and there is another char that arises at the mouth of the vulva, and the clittoris, and by chance leaps out, and according to its semblance like a cow, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "cow disease". If you must cut it, as we have said about the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accident by disease that comes to it; or it is by flesh joined, or by subtle syfac or thick, and it is made in the ribs, or in the side, or below, or wherever; and prevents conception, and childbirth, and by adventure the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the regard of the bailiff. If the stoppage is near appearing, if it wants at its two parts or at the back. If it is subtle syfac, and it is near two levers, then hasten, and do this: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then having formed the two levers, as long as the subtle syfac is gone, and the stoppage is over; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and lay the woman to bed every day, so that she cannot move. And if the syfac is hard and thick, it is necessary that you cut it with a spatula resembling myrtle leaves. If the stoppage is of flesh born, then suspend it at the knee and cut it; and have the medicines astringent blood, as acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together with an abundance of egg; then administer a bandage of wide cloth, so that the wound cannot close; and thus for a long time, and administer a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed. And when in the ribs comes flesh born, then it must be cut according to this manner, unless it is inflamed abscesses. For the inflamed abscess that is in the ribs, one should not touch to make.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without accustomed short and when hemorrhoids are old they become thickened; and we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the thickening, when they are deep in the flesh, and they do not appear to smell, unless it is cured by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the flesh, one can feel them, are those that one can cure. It therefore behooves you to put the woman in a cold house, then are the thickened ones with tweezers, and the cut in their roots, then powder above medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet out into the open air for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if there comes a discharge of blood, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and galangal and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and aisil, and make .i. plaster on her back. And if it hardens, it is good. If this does not happen, then you make air suction on the back and breasts without injuring them; then take linen, and soak it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and make air suction on its place. And when the abscess settles, cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and the one that is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to .i. sharp chief, so it must be cut as I have said about the thickening; and then cure it until it is healed.
Abscesses of the flesh
Many kinds of abscesses come in the flesh, such as chancres and purulent abscesses and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It therefore behooves me to say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in the flesh, which is not of the abscesses that boil well; and if you want to know the work of iron, look at whether the abscess is aggravated at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.  Therefore do not hasten to pierce it, but let it die down until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a small seat, with two small seats where he leans, and supports his back and brings his feet together from the legs; and let his hips be spread apart, and put his arms below his knees, and tie them well with a good linen; then draw the person towards the right side of the body, and administer the instrument which is used to open the mouth of the flesh, for this comes after. And it behooves you that when you want to administer this instrument, that you put the tip first in to know the depth of the flesh, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it behoovees to cover the depth of the flesh with cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt them; and it behooves you that he put the tip of the instrument above, and hold the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one holds it gently by hand, it must be covered at the head, on the spatula; and when the boil is emptied, it behoovees to put in the wound bandages moistened with rose oil, or green ointment; and put the bandage from the wound to the bottom of the flesh, and put over the flesh and above the palm of the hand a clean linen cloth soaked in water or mallows being boiled; then cure it after two days of ointment until it is healed; and some time lift the flesh and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then water or roots of lilies and long arisotle, being boiled; then return to the ointment. And if the wound has returned in the flesh, it behoovees that you guard against burning iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is first necessary to the midwife that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down, and desire to smell the air; then hasten the birth out of force, it being born; so know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and is the head first, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends upon its head, then follows the second with it, and is cleansed the body of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes upon its feet, and comes out toward the body or the shoulder, or the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or loin, and it is converted by chance on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
If the child comes upon its head by natural birth, and the woman is in labor and giving birth hard, and the virtues of it are weak, then have her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her; and rise its nature of oil or fennel seed that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs with the little spatula which here is the form: and cleave the secondine, and cut at its fingernail until the moisture that is inside is out; and grasp the belly of the woman so long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it behooves to clysterize the woman with musk of fenugrec with oil of sesame; then make her inhale and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will be extracted. And if the two hands come out, then it behooves that you reset them gently poco a poco; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one stool, and raise her feet up; then tip over the stool to the ground, and hold onto the woman so that she does not fall during the tipping; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the knife which is beforehand placed, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
of the issue of the child on his feet When the child comes on his feet, then it behooves to push upwards; and then he turns it back and forth, until it is even.
then seize i. the feet and extend it back and forth.
Unless it jumps up to the hips, if commanded to grasp, and make it sneeze from condition. if it jumps, God willing.
And if it is not as we have said, turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is lightly.
And if it does not come as we have said, then take a handful of alum, and oil of sesame, and pounded gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment, then make him sit upright, seated down to below the ribs.
and when it is softened underneath, make him a collar of myrrh, and put it underneath, and let him leave for an hour. then make him sit on a seat, then make him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take his belly lightly, because the child is now jumping. from the exit of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands there little by little.
from the issue of the child who comes out with a wide hand it is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman rise and leave;
If it cannot walk, make her lie on a bed, i.e., a litter, and tie her legs together.
Then administer the poultice that I have recounted;
And if she does not give birth, make her sit on a seat, then study how to bring back the hand; And draw out the child according to the natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command her to strain herself as long as the child is being born.
of the delivery of the child on his neck, and have his hands spread out, and his face turned toward the back of his mother It is convenient that the midwife hold his hand, then turn it little by little, and the ewe lightly.
and when it is equalized, put it on the soft flesh of the area and oil, as we have said, then command her that she move little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on one seat, and command her that she sneeze; and make the face sneeze. In this same manner to all the spine
In this same manner to all the spine When it comes to treating in this manner to the entire spine, cut the spine with your finger, until the moisture is gone.
And if the child can't breathe through their face and neck, cut the bone so that it is not held back, and kill the child;
Then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman that she does not get pregnant again;
from the separation of the twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they may be named;
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the sifac which divides them, which is tied to the bud.
And sometimes they come out as naturally as one under all, as we have said.
And if they come out roughly, then the cure as we have said, and let the bandage be subtle, and make it quickly and lightly what it does; and do so as it is worth for salvation. of many children
of many children At no time are formed in the marshes i. or ii. or iii. or iv. or v. or vi. or vii., or more up to xv., and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his glorious sage,
and it is necessary that the bailiff knows all these things, because by chance similar things happen. if it is done according to what is right.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she has fear of death;
it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back, and her head inclined downward, and her legs raised;
and the minister binds the swaddling cloth in two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated in the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with moss of holly and fennel and flaxseed, then grease his hands with these oils and these mulsilages; then insert them gently into the mare, then desire one lung where she puts the onions that are suitable to these;
and take ward if the child is appeared that he descends upon his head; if he places the pins in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs
and if the descent is on the feet, he places or pierces him and the sides of the feet.
and it is necessary that he hold the pin in his right hand, and place the curve between his two fingers of the left hand, and thrust it with all his hand lightly, and place the pin in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
Then place against the other bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions are even;
and then make them even by moving one side and the other, so that they go easily in, and let the bones be toothed to hold them, like this is the form.
And if a part remains, then oil some of its joints with oil and put them in that part, and draw the other part.
And if nothing remains of it, then put this bone or higher than its place, and do so until it goes all the way out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be returned by constriction, then you must envelope it with a bandage, until it is whole.
Then cover the joint of the hand or at the wrist, and in this way you must do with the other hand, for two feet.
And if the joint of the child is swollen and it protrudes, or there is an acute head gathered If it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two [parts], and make the point and draw out the water. or you shall do it with the instrument called "almidach," so that its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one.
and in the same way, do it if the child has a large head naturally. And then with pliers, draw out the bones,
and if the head is dislocated and it is forced back, it may be split, as long as the moisture that is or worse has come out.
and if it cannot be brought out, cut it in pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you should pierce it until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the well is light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or in the breast, then it is necessary that you draw it out, that is, wrap a cloth around the hand; and make the belly or breast, until the moisture inside is dried.
And if the other members are set in place, and the head remains then have the barber push his hand into the joint of the bone, and pull it up to the opening of the joint; then he puts 1 or 2, and the  treatment will be;
and if the mouth of the abscess is retracted because of the hot cautery which has come there, it does not need to be worked on; but one should administer moist and fatty things; and administer poultices, and  soaked in softening and moisturizing water.
And if the child is on his side, and you can put him straight, then administer what we have said in a living child.
And if one cannot do this, then the limb should be treated in pieces, and nothing of the second part should be left behind.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said in abscesses that come on the thigh.
And if discharge of blood comes, then put it in vinegar for restraining, and administer other remedies to him.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one fetus had been killed, then conceived another on top of it, and refused death to the other. After a long time, it came an abscess in the belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to great suppuration.
I was called to the cure, and I pondered long, and could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came one bone, and after some days another. I was amazed a great deal because this one whose belly has no bone.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and in my hands were bones, as long as the woman was getting better; and the woman lived a long time like this, and she had a little bit of flesh in that place;
and I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when masters find a strange thing, they may know how to help.
how to bring the bone back to its place
Here after comes the form of the pressor, which we have in the books; and to two turns at two joints of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the shaft be i.e. two finger widths wide, and the margin of the trees i.e. must be, and long one palm and a half. and between the two limbs be two adjustments of this same shaft, which are fastened in one and the other, of half a palm long or one poke more.
and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar in appearance more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood shaft, according to the appearance of pliers. and have two joints two fastenings, as you see, one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the mare [vulva] with all the instrument, so make the woman sit on one bed, the feet hanging and legs apart, then put the two fastenings together fastened in the mare [vulva], and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand with all the instrument, as you have done with tongs evenly, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the mare [vulva], as long as the woman does what she wants.
This instrument are all surmounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the eyes have seen them appear, so much is more hasty the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is held at childbirth, it behooves that you command the woman to hold her breath, and then make her cough with condiment, and restrain her hands to her mouth and nose; and if she jumps by this, well is it.
If this does not work, take one pot and make one hole or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
All these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put one end of a rope or opening into the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the marsh.
And steam it until the vapor comes inside the marsh; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If the secondine is jumped upon suddenly. And if it remains after this treatment and is not better, command the woman to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in the ointment of alum, and then put it in the area
and look for the second one; and when she has found it, she grasps it and extends it little by little straightly, so that the hair does not fall out during extraction but it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled; if it comes and unroots itself
And if the opening of the hair follicle is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
and if it is not of all those that we have said, then guard that you do not use for the milk.
but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the mare, you tie him to the hip of the woman, then clysterize with ointment four-pharmakon.
if she carries and brings it back, and comes again for good; but nonetheless, when she carries if there comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and pales the patient.
Therefore it is necessary appropriate fumigations for those: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument for fumigating the woman at the time of childbirth is as follows:
And it is like a dog in shape, and one puts the head fine into the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
and let the fumigation be over hot coals, and the tar as long as it is consumed, and start another one.
to examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by subtle syringes: so it becomes necessary for the midwife that she pierces that syringe at its proper place, and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guard the incision so that she does not touch it;
then put on the half-linen in wine and oil, then the ointment's cure until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it does not re-stop, then put or pierce a cane of plomb, and leave him for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this stupefaction comes from a closing of a wound or an abscess; so it is necessary to cover that closing; if it is cured, as we have said about the cautery of lead.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodules, and larger than those that come near the outer foundation, or in the space of two parts,
if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is ancient, it works, and constantly moisture a white or subtle slime,
and sometimes these fistulas are pierced; and they are known by those who have them or excretion or ventorosity when the patient defecates, and perhaps in jumping some come out.
And if fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and reach up to the junction of the groin, and up to the root of the thigh.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing: and is that you put your two index fingers or base, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if it has crookedness, then put in a tent of fine lead, or one hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tent or hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come through by expulsion or windiness or liquid, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure.
And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the passage of urine, so that urine flows out, and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tendon comes up to the place. If there is no twisting and the pain is within the joint, then it is that there is a bowing there, and there is no value in medicine or treatment by ointment.
And in these fistulas Persians have no cure except for labor, and vanity of the foolish miracles that intervene in them.
In the one that is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you raise the legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes to.
If the patient feels it near the base, then it behooves you to put your index finger there.
and then feel whether the tent has pierced it; and be discovered or you feel between your finger the soft flesh or the bone, then know that it is passed through; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it
One says nevertheless that one can well heal none, but this happens rarely.
and the aid one does, if one carefully applies the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and it is all heated in the fistula, as far as it comes to the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these burnt charcoals are burned, which are resembling an owl's feather;
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that flesh shall be, then the cure of ointment closing flesh and sewing.
If it is thus healed, it is well. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent gets in and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering of the heart; if you cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then the cautery after, as long as it comes to the head of the tent;
and shall be delivered the tent, and shall shrink; then seize those hairs which appear like a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
And if the blood flows continuously, and goes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery unites two good things: namely, the burning of these joined hairs, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure with tents moistened in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound lies open, and if the hairs are burned in the wound;
Then cure the wound of inflammation by applying hard dried flesh, and are the medicines dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes just to the bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then put your finger or foundation in it, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent and between two is the cloth or the syfac or char, where it is close to piercing, then there is only a way of faith and hope by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, put a tent and cure it like first.
and do not cut too deep, that you do not cut the holding that holds the base, and let the evacuations come by the way of the will; then cure it, as we have said.
then cure it, as we have said. perhaps then it will heal, or you remove that covering and the membrane after it has been cut near its base, or by tent or other pointed instrument; Then bind the flesh flap that is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study to restore the wound, and leave the fistula in the part outside the foundation; this is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or costs to the foundation near the skin above, if you take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And it puts one thread twisted in two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is pulled in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that which was pierced, as you put your two or foundation.
and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to the other, and let it be one day or two;
and restrain it no times, until the thread's ends that are between two, and stick together.
Then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Because it is not fitting to make a wound covering too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spatula spine from which one makes a fistula is quite useful, in one part and cutting; and on the other hand no, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are within the foundation, as much as a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short, they bleed. And there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture.
and moreover there or a drop of citrine water or a drop of blood, and it has the color of the body.
And the care of those who have them within the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch for to go into chambers, as long as the foundations are wet, and the threads appear. If you hasten, and can hold it with tongs, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots.
And if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one drapery, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and the strap them to your two hands, then cut them, and powder above with some hot powders that are in place of cautery; or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the foundation cannot be released, then have the patient do a clensing with a sharp and harsh enema to wash out what is in the foundation, so that it can be released openly.
and if the patient resists, and if the threads are strong from the foundation, then the cure is light; and it is that you prick them with your finger or pliers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it in a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, and if it is double; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood;
then put on the foundation one draping moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and put it over the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then leave it until they heal, and when they are healed, treat them with ointments and other treatments, until they are sound.
of drying of the veins or foundation Many times there is drying of veins in the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the sickness is old and the medicine is no use.
Then it behooves you to scrape at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail the crust above, which does not allow it to become moist. then cure until it is healed as it should;
and if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more strongly than before, until it heals well, and is scraped. then cure until it is healed.
about trembling An ant is a small appearance made before the body, and it goes much in depth.
And no times finds it cold, and one feels it also like dead from trembling, and comes in all the body, and more to the hands than other part.
And the cure is that you take a  cane of an ostrich feather, or a vulture feather strong, and put that cane on the trembling, until the circles purple the trembling all around. then turn your hand to all the cane until you copy all around the trembling, and put it in depth, and pull out the trembling by its roots.
And if you see it, so do this of a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
nor pierce it, for to keep the two together, and move pressed And if you see it, so cauterize the furrow, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clyster Never is a clyster made of silver or lead, or molten iron or mesh; and never are these instruments small and large, according to those who are administered them.
Those therefore who are administered in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster is small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
And there is an opening or the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and has on one side two openings, and on the other one;
And it is the belly where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small openings,
and between each opening one must place a space, then put into these openings one strong thread of twisted thread in ten or as much as it is necessary, and assemble the belly like it is a ram; and when the medicine is inside, if the one has the instrument in front of a strong thread, then clench; and this is the form of the circle.
And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently.
then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together until it is all full, then withdraws the clyster, and raises the patient's legs to the side.
and if the medicine wants to work well, so let the hair grow as much as it can; and if he sleeps one night completely, then it is greater help.
And if you cleanse him with a clyster for a disease of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to work well, so let him restart it until he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or an abscess, so let the clyster be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle clyster on which the skin is restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will say the cures of hands and medicine, according to completion.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cuts of sword and knife, or of spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, for remembrance comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound is large, and you greatly doubt an abscess hot: if the head itself bleeds from it and even if little blood comes from the wound, and the bleeding is on the contrary from the surrounding area;
And avoid the patient’s repletion of wine and thick meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be lessened, and drink no wine, nor eat much flesh;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in wine stiptce;
and if there is no abscess hot, then put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it has not been moved by the air, powder, that I will say a little after.
and if the art has moved it, then put on some ointment, until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be joined together by tents, then join them with sutures, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed bone and cartilage, and only holds together by one point, then cover it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin. And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as roast and cooked barley, also poultry, and similar things.
And if you find yourself with rotten skin and it doesn't reach the bone, so cut away all the rot and throw it out, then treat it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then cut the artery, and if you find it displaced, tie it with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put into them this powder which unites as soon as the arsenic has worked.
And the manner of the powder is this: take frankincense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; quicklime 3 parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and restrain it firmly, until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
and then bandage it well, and leave it unbandaged if it doesn't swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have the frankincense nor the dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
And if the wound has been moved by fire, even in the wound itself, then do not put this powder there.
But put upon it certain dressings digested, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it heals. Then care for the wound with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine pincers.
and I will tell you hereafter the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of them is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as chaulmoogra washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked wash also in sweet water. and other stones of the mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, so sew it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is raised and full of bump, then pierce it or lower.
And if the artery is cut, and blood flows, then stop it, and clot it, and cauterize it as the matter requires.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the passage is guarded by which the meat goes. Then stitch the heart above the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape. and then the strain occurs, and he leaves it for some days, then cures with ointment dressings until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so desire. and if there are pieces of bone, then treat them all with fire, and those that you cannot have, leave them as long as the wound is rotting. and be careful to clear and align the opening.
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of the wound from a lance or a knife
If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then see if from the wound there is windiness as the patient gasps: know then that the wound is mortal;
And if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put any powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not remain in depth. And return to the heart, and apply it to the patient; but put attractive ointment on it, and bind it two times a day;
and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there come not spasms, nor bad heart tremors nor pulling of the arm; and when you see good arrangements, then know that the wound is saved. Heal it therefore with tents and other dressings, as long as it is healing;
and if it cannot heal, and work, know that there is an fistula; so treat as one must.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, treat as that which is before.
If it is large, sew it up; and if it is small, cover it with powder, and if it is deep into the bone, and has broken pieces, then pull the wound closed and remove the fragments if they are visible. And if they are not visible, leave the wound to rot, so it will alleviate the extraction;
and for other wounds to other members is judgment as we have said.
of the stomach's displacement
The displacements of the stomach are great and medium and small;
from the large wound sometimes the intestine, or the nerves of the intestines,  are pushed in;
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes worse the small wound than the great.
Therefore one puts back into place intestines again, if one does not put them back hot in hot. Because the intestines swell immediately when they feel cold, so they enter less into place,
And because of that, the middle wound is worse, for that reason one resets the intestine to its place like the others two.
And knows that rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the suture of other wounds of the body and two other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
and nonetheless they are closer with the suture of the belly, and I will say one by one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has come out. and if something else is wounded, it is by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said. or because the intestine is swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Half a sponge or piece of cloth in lukewarm water only, or you cook in hot water with laurel and cypress and spice, and boil the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes it is done with this restraining binding, and it moves only to loosen.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or ale and herbs be cooked. for by this it is aligned the entrance to little things.
and if it cannot enter, then make an opening in the wound with the instrument of which one uses to cut hemorrhoids.
and the first cure is to move the spine that we should not cut into it unless there is great necessity.
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if cut inwards in the curve and not outwards, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails are thrown out, if it is put back into its proper place according to natural form, if you have the power, because it is worthwhile.
When the wound is wide and it is in the area below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
And also if a rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you set your attention on that part being higher than the other;
and thus it is necessary to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
In small wounds put what you have seen;
Then you hold between your hands i.e., minister pitiful who holds all the tearing to his hand, and assembles the lips; and this is the common way of suturing,
and this is the common way of suturing, and that you prick a needle or more, according to the quantity and largeness of the wound, Then leave from the head of the wound, that is, a space; and there put a needle where it has, that is, a good strong thread; and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the suture,
Then the straining of a doubled thread around the needle of 2 parts, Then assemble the 2 heads of the wound together,
and then leave 1 finger width of space, and insert another needle; Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do this according to what you need of needles. as long as the whole wound is restrained;
and the needles are medium-sized, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut through all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well; For this reason they must be shorted.
And it is not proper to put the needles too far out of the flesh and skin.
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the soldering;
and then trim the points of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or cloths at the shoulder of the needles to hold them in place and let them stay until the wound is closed;
and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because one needle or two are used.
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two ends of the skin and the two ends of the fascia together with a needle on which there is one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced all these four ends together,
and when you will have pierced all these four ends together, then withdraw the needle to the part where you have begun, in the manner one sews the garments;
and put a space between each suture the thickness of a finger;
this suture is sewed on the man,
and I sew a wound that a knight had on his belly,
which was slashed with a knife, and was the wound more than a palm wide, and was exposed intestines two palms wide,
and was the wound in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been for twenty-four hours,
And the wound was sewed up for fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed.
And the healers had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in one place where there was none to be found, nor any medicine. and I put a little clean cloth on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water and honey until it healed.
Or I will tell you the two proper manners of stitching:
Take the needle and thrust it from the outside part to the inside.
When it has pierced the middle straight through, lay the point of the suture or thread where you have thrust the needle,
and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside.
and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier does furs and that you leave once the flap on one side, and take it back on the other, until the sewing is complete.
The second manner of sewing, which Galens says properly
is like how some make a  two parts together naturally and apply one of the chiefs to the other chief, in such a manner:
insert a needle or chief of the miraculous proximity, and make him feel only that. and leave the two chiefs of the syfac; then turn the needle and make it felt from the outside part to the inside one. as the two shoulders
then make one and the other feel from the outer part up to that within, in two other shoulders of the mirror which are on the other side
and this is the middle way of sewing and the most common one.
The Galicians say this word, and no one testifies to it,
one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each.
and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the stitch more grievous than of the other parts of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the art has moved it, then set back the intestine and its covering; then put on the powder preventing flesh
then set back the intestine and its covering; then put on the powder preventing flesh and if the art has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals; and stitch the thread, and weld the facets, and the mirror; then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed;
and if you lack medicines, place upon it, as soon as it begins to gape open, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
For you have no need of other medicines in many cases when the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make communion to the principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten the linen lightly with oil of temperate heat, or rose oil, and place it around the wounds, and under the armpits;
and if he feels pain or rot in the joints, and many times it happens if the enemas of red wine help, and similarly if the rot comes as far as the intestine
and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one
The intestine that is called "young" cannot heal when it is rotten and this is because of the planting of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the wire jumps from the wound, put it back as soon as it is fresh, just like the intestine.
and if it is old and has turned black, then you must tie the blackened part so that bleeding does not come from it. for there are veins and arteries in it;
then cut what is between the ligament and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound all the way outward to align the extraction when the bones fall and the wound bends.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, If it can, restore it in some men,
For which I see that one man was pierced in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and from it he expelled excrement and wind;
I made his care according to what I could, and did not cease from treating until he was healed, and the bones joined.
And when I saw him join, I doubted that the patient had poorly in his belly; and he had no ailment, but remained in better disposition, and ate and drank;
And they said to the experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in this manner; Take pliers with large jaws, then assemble the lips of the wound. And when the pliers have opened the mouth, put it upon the two lips.
then put one other bandage after it in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered
and cover the wound. That which chiefs gets hardened in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient,
and one can bind up the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that is very cleaned and then tie to the head of this thread i.e., a fine linen thread twisted , then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it through the rupture;
and this manner of suture of limbs is not worse than according to the way of hope and expectation;
and if the wound is large and wide, even when it is in one of the vital intestines, there is nothing else or salves, except for subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, it is universally called "fistula," and also when it is pulled back and bent.
And a fistula is according to the truth a false knot hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also pulled back like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in some clear jump back, and sometimes thick; sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the 8 causes:
namely, because of the smallness of blood or flesh; or for his wickedness; or because he has hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow flesh to grow; or he has too much swelling; or his flesh is rotten and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is tardy for digestion, and slow for health, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones :
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Therefore it behooves me to make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; For there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sifaca, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs. or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of bad healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you are confident in the cure, and you see it clearly, if you take a tent of iron or tin, if the fistula is straight, then curved;
and if the fistula is twisted, then enclose it with a subtle tent of lead; for lead molds itself to follow the twisting;
and if the fistula has openings by hand and you cannot well seek it by tents, if you clysterize by one of the openings,
for moisture goes from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then probe carefully with your finger so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and whether it is closed in some way,
and ask carefully from the patient the pain that he feels when pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the cut according to what I have told you, and bone be the fault and the corrupt things that are inside; and then the cure until it is healed
and if the fistula is well deep from right place, so it is necessary that you cut it as deep as you can then put moist sponges in aguish medicine, and put them to the head of the fistula
then put moist sponges in aguish medicine, and put them to the head of the fistula until the medicine corrupts the superfluity that is remaining at the bottom
and then he puts ointment healing flesh, as long as it is sound
and if it is not sound by this, then cauterize it as we have said
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it. If a vein or nerve does not strike or affect principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, so cleanse the king as long as the corruption is all removed. then treat it with things that enclose flesh until it is sound;
and if it is not sound, and returns bowed as before, know that you have not gone far enough;
If you uncover and want as long as you are at the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
And if it is thus healed, that is well. If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; if there isn't another way to leave to nature
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with pliers if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this
and if there are many bones, draw them all out, don't leave any one behind;
and if moisture acts against you, and there is no error or fear, if it copes with moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something on the wound preventing rot, and leave it until the flesh around the bones rots,
and therefore they will have more easily the bones;
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you cleanse only as long as the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of corruption, and comes up to the flesh of the bone. if it is necessary to be shaved and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed.
and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was one young man about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
until the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and there was no external cause to open it;
but the surgeon, by their folly, opened it so much that the abscess burst open, and a great deal of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all was wet and humid from the body;
and many a mirror they put to care for two years, and there is no wise man in the art of hands,
as long as I was called upon, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they were treating him, and those who ran through the streets for a great distance. and their bodies turned red from youth, and had a citrine color.
I put a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I then inserted and pushed into one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside;
I was that one who showed me of the rotten bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption, except that which I removed;
and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines for long times, and could not heal;
and then I started again, and discovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I removed it, and then I removed it, and I was concerned about sewing up the place;
but I could not as much as I grasped around a palm of the bone, and the [he/it] was at all its flesh. then I restored him with medicines; and he was healed and joined quickly,
and it was no longer necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure and for the fear of death that I had of him. For by the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed entirely.
For by the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed entirely. and in the place of the bone a hard cartilage was born, and he was of good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary in any way, neither going nor coming.
and stretch the bandage so that you pull the corrupt flesh downwards, and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to see, so that the bone does not whiten the flesh; and place one ember or a board under the bone so as to cover the corrupted flesh. and it is necessary to be as careful as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be even more careful other times.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open well, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover all the flesh; then place one ember under,
and then so from one part to the other the corruption, and be the silk of the long of the corruption i.e. point, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and be the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to cut;
and if the corruption is or at the heel of the hand, or or at the heel of the foot, then it is very strong that thing; but nevertheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you. and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve do not oppose you;
and know that the instruments and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of each, and their thickness and delicacy, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to equip each kind of operation with its instrument;
and knows that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of the diseases; so consider the instrument that you need according to this one that is fitting.
of fire The shoulder can be dislocated due to things inside, or outside.
and when you have treated that corrosion with the cures of medicines, and they are not helpful at all, then it is necessary to cover that limb until the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes through those of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
so that the patient escapes through those of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness, then comes the corrosion of limb by limb, and takes over the whole body; so hasten in covering,
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as scorpions from the sea and vipers and similar.
If the corrosion is at the top of the thigh, cut it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, cut it with the knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death. and there is no use of remedies beyond the quantity of its virtue.
And so do this when the corrosion comes or reaches a bone: if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes to a bone, cut the whole bone. And if it ascends into the leg, cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to leave the patient to death.
And the manner of cutting or sewing the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister to the lower binding, and another minister to the upper binding, and you will cut the flesh that is between the two bindings to one spatula wide, as far as the bone is uncovered;
Then cover it or skin it, and put on each side one linen cloth, so that the skin does not touch the healthy place. And if another wound and abscess comes to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place thoroughly, or you put on some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
then bind the limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed
and I shall tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
he had on it a blackness which seemed burnt by fire,
and that corrosion came first in the heel of his foot, until it consumed the whole foot;
and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastily covered his foot, and was healed;
and long time after, it returned the corrosion to where two of the hand, and he came to me,
and I placed on him things reverberative after the purification of the body, and could not cease the corrosion;
and he begged that I should cut off his hand, and I would not, for I had hope of reverberating the matter; and fear also if he cuts his hand, that it will not get worse, because the man's virtues were weak; and he despaired of all things, and returned to his land, and he hastened to cover his hand, and was healed;
and I have not recounted this tale for no reason, but because one does it differently if there is need.
At no time comes an abscess in its fleshy place, and stays so long that it causes great assembly of pus. And then it bursts and perforates, and in jumping the pus, and remains its vessels, like a vessel. And the skin that is above is as subtle as one fine sheet of fabric, and does not pierce until the bone, nor until the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy",
but if it is so lengthened that it reaches the bone and perforates it, then it is called «fistula»;
and the treatment for this is that you cut all around that skin, and even when it is thin, like a cloth; and do not let it be healed for its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not fully formed, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it thusly with a clyster:
look if the breasts are large, and the bowel within them smells foul, then clysterize it with Egyptian medicine which is made thusly: Take oil, and lead, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in 1 vessel over the fire. Until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in clysters put it in the stomach, and extract the pus; and let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it pressing;
do this many times, until the chest is purified, and fear is removed;
and at no time is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is present, and it is that you take ashes from a vine trunk, and pour water on top,
then let it flow and cleanse, until you know that the breasts are well cleansed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then cleanse with a mixture of water and honey or where there is a bit of litharge ground. or you may cleanse with a clyster of honey and mellowed wine, for honey has the property of purifying and washing and wine makes the flesh red;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well purified, if the clyster of those who makes flesh come out in it,
and that you apply a plaster definitive, and make it with rose oil and in wine; or you clysterize it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have said the properties or treated of the ointments;
and if the opening of the chest is small, and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter it, then widen it with an iron a bit, and put inside a tent of the Egyptian ointment, or basil oil, as much as it needs to be widened;
and if the wound is too wide, so the cloth and leave it only as much as the clyster can enter
And if the perforated that hangs low is above, so the copes or lower than it is. For when the bowel is in full, so do not let anything enter it; and if you cannot cover the breast below as you wish, If it is arranged in such a manner that the belly goes to its lowest point
and if you cannot cover the breast as well as you want, if it is arranged in such a manner: that the belly goes slightly downwards and nothing remains from the belly; and take medicinal ointments to put on the chest
and place over it i.e., a cloth of linen that covers the whole chest; then close with force the opening of the breast i.e., slightly wider than the first, then place ointment above  i.e., another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and place it over the hole of the chest to align the rib, and remove not the large cloth outside except after many days once.
and the one that is out of the hole of the chest, often remove to remove the rib, and know what came from the rib, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or indigested;
and take ward if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see nature leaping above the chest wound if you know that the breast is already healing, and approaches health;
and then untie it in the morning, or at midday, and when you untie the wound, if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the chest lies bowed ingestible after many days, know that the chest does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, do not despair of health.
for health approaches. Because there are men who take a long time to heal wounds and some do the opposite;
and if the chest lies bowed ingestible after many days, know that the chest does not heal well;
and if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, then apply medications drying in substance and dry in virtue, as for example diaphani ointment, because it contains a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take diaphan ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the essence of old wine equal in substance;
then boil it and use it; and the same thing made honey cooked mixed; when inflammation has ended,
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is over the fire; and then you smear it with one cloth, and place it on the chest, and at some time one administers a long rod; and roots of the celestial lily, which is also like flour of vetiver and centaury;
and roots of the celestial lily, which is also like flour of vetiver and centaury; and in the use of simples or composites: grind them, and make it into powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it. and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure, then know that the corruption has advanced, and makes an impression in the bone, or hard parts, or limbs; if the cure of fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the angle
Panares is an abscess that arises under the fingernail of the hand, or of the foot, or by chance arises in other places;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then comes one abscess or another, and corrode and cast the bow as long as they corrode to the root of the joint, and perhaps they corrode all of it.
and comes the corrosion to the bone, as long as there comes pain pungent, and is the shoulder two wide, and is the color fixed.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit then it is necessary that you cut to it with iron all the superfluity which is remaining from the joint, Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail presses against the flesh, and it begins to prick, and the flesh then it is necessary that you place a piece of leather under the nail that pricks the flesh, and the top of it, and cut this carefully and lightly. and put on top the remaining of the medicine hot and corrosive to take away all.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and treat it carefully, because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
and if you see the two bones become corrupted, cut it in one as we have said before. then treat it until it is healthy.
and if it is broken, and bruised, and it causes great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the bone with a spatula-shaped instrument by cutting across from above,
And guard that the blade does not come until the flesh which is below the bone, for the patient would feel too great pain;
And if it happens, place something above it which soothes.
The two joints which are born in the hands of some men by chance are entirely fleshy, and by chance there is sometimes bone, and sometimes there is a nail,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in no one's two. He who is born in no one's two does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance moves.
The waist of one who is fleshy is light, in such manner: Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint, is grievous to cure; so keep it from being cut.
In one who is born or should be at the end of the buttock, you should first cut away the rounded flesh until the bone. Then set the bone to a suitable cloth for that, then treat it until it is healed.
The seams that come to two together come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you set that seam so that the parts return according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil so they do not close. And you put between two pieces of fine lead, until their edges are soldered, as it is fitting.
If soldering comes to none of its two with the palm, then that soldering as it is fitting.
Of vil
Veins are thick and full of melancholy superfluities, that come in more members of the body;
And more happens in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging of colocynth, and then the herb from the basilica.
The cure with iron is done in two ways: one is with the cauterization, and then drawing out black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein and draw all of the blood from it.
The hip is treated in this manner: first, raise the leg in hot water very strongly, until the large sinew becomes thin. Then restrain the leg of the patient from above the hip down to the part below the knee; then cut open a vein in one place, or in two or in three, of a wide size,
then draw and pour out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much sinew as the strength of the patient can bear.
and then the bandage, and command him to stay on a diet of meats avoiding black cabbage.
and restart evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the leg of the patient is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient if there is a lot of hair. then put it in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red and the veins swell.
and if you have no bath, then warm it by the fire, and then place it in the vein between the ankle and the knee, or below the ankle.
then work the skin with the incision, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when felt.
and you see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord;
then push the point below, until it is raised from the skin, and then lean it on the incision lightly,
then the cut in one other place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears. Then lift the vein to its root, as you have done, and bend it onto another needle, as you did first.
Then cut another notch, or more if you need them, then lift the vein, and cut at the two points of the foot.
Then pull and lift it up to the second notch; then extract it notch by notch until all of it comes out, then cut.
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, then put a needle to the whole. that is, a strong double thread and tie it and draw it out, and put below that one (thread), and turn your hand this way and that, until it comes out and keep it from breaking, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out nor lift it, and there comes annoyance to the patient
and when you have drawn it out completely, place over the wound's spot wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and care for it until it is healed
And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said if it is necessary that you cut it tortuously, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you cut it tortuously, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The form of the iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut, so that it only cuts the vein
and is of a large curve, because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees are born, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it is born elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to rot that comes from under the skin,
just as it comes from within the body of serpents and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes its color, and begins the vein to pour out, as like a root of a plant.
When the head opens, then it is necessary that you enclose around a piece of plank from one and a half to two finger-widths, and the knot,
and leave the plank on the leg, and all times that it is in pain at the outside, then envelop around the plank, and the knot; and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is fully out. for if you cut it, it enters into the flesh, and brings about abscess and rot there, and bad sickness.
Therefore, for that reason, it is necessary that it be treated piece by piece until the top, and nothing of it remain in the body.
and sometimes this vein when it is treated of five palms long, or of ten, And one man came to me, who had it [an ailment] that was ten palms in length, and when you cut it, it shoots out one ray or spur, and it pierces right through to the bottom.
So that all of it issues; and be emptied the matter that is inside, and administer to the place medicines preventing corruption any day, then heal it like abscesses.
And at this vein some pains, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and from it much spurts, and from which it shoots pains; cure it therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land “ox disease,” because it often happens to oxen,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down. and one feels it well at the alert of limb to limb, until they reach the skin where it goes, and leaps further;
and is caused by rot from some humors, like those that come towards snakes and worms and parasites in the belly;
and doubt is cast upon its malice, for when it travels through the body and goes up to the head and comes to the eye, perhaps it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drained, one can only help when it goes away:
so then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong bandage tightly
then cover it and treat the wound, and if the bone is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dries.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it inflames the eye, as we have said;
And if you see it coming or near the eye, restrain below him the eyebrow form, then cut above, and the drive out.
And it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicines dissolving for the ills humors corrupted,
and if worse of meats engendering putrefaction.
Of the pain which comes from windiness This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and .i. poc after, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, as quickly as living silver when it departs from its place.
the pain departs from that location and moves into the shoulder.
and then a little while after it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm.
then she told me that it was returning again around her body, as I saw it.
I marveled greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I have never seen this illness in this manner. Nevertheless, I have seen many who well had moved pain from one place to another, but I have never seen it like this, as I see it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were uncovered, and because of this appears that constraint windiness;
and do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and swollen veins.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lesion above and below evenly, and then cut as much as that constraint windiness at its place has been removed; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who release wind, such as foul pills, and pills of safflower, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small ones, and hairy ones, and smooth ones. And of those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have parts; and those that fall in any member so they fall in two ways: or in the principal member it falls,
such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls therefore into any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you after, appear to you: if it is necessary that you take care of the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in many circumstances; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then treat it, and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is on the brain, is when scotome and sod and eversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and mixing of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps this without force from the nostrils, or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and jump from the wound moisture white resembling to poultices, and in jump also as burned of flesh;
and if this sign appears to you, then hold off from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not within.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and sweat cold, and fainting: Know then without doubt that death descends.
And the sign of the little arrow that does not come out is that without pains of foam leaps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the shoulder, it is near the ribs; and it gives great pain and great suffering and sighing; and it moves all the members from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested food will jump out of the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and nothing of straw comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out with it and flows, and the patient feels intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the arms and necks and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and  forearms and hips and legs, and similar members, are saved according to more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason that you do something like that.
It happened to one man with an arrow that fell or stuck in the root of the nose: I tried it, and drew it from another side under the fat of the ear, and was healed without any sense [of pain or problem].
And treat with a game an arrow that falls in the fat of the eye under the skin. and the arrow was removed, and one could only reach the point towards the shaft, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all i. with light iron without ears; the game was unharmed, and he suffered no ill consequences.
And treat an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
I became the beards, and I subtly did until I betrayed it, and was healed the Christians.
And betrayed an arrow to one man, that he was in his belly, and thought that he would die;
and then that he had passed thirty days, so he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I tightened it, and betrayed it further, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow was shot into his back or belly, and the wound was closed over;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor causes any ailment in any of his natural functions.
And see another man, to whom an arrow was shot into his face, and the wound closed over;
and remains so suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in  a lord, the king, that it was stuck between his eyes, and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded
I was called in for treatment after three days had passed. I found the wound very narrow.
I felt it with a whole subtle tent, and I did not feel it at all. And he felt a prickling and pain below his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow.
I put on its place a plaster atractive and digestible, because the  place did not swell. and I appeared the way of the arrow.
and I appeared the way of the arrow. I put the bandage on it that day, and closed the wound tightly, and left the patient like that for a long time.
until he felt the arrow inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a sharp corrosive medicine for several days, until it was open
And feel it, and feel the head of the arrow that is straightening to its place. Then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me.
And it pierced well through its ends for about four months.
And then I widened the wound so that I put the forceps in it, and my hand on one side and on the other, and it could not move out.
Therefore do not cease to subtly work and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day a very well-made pair of pliers according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it and restored the wound.
And the mirrors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it therefore, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed entirely.
Or you have been told the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your care on those which I do not say, because the books cannot fully comprehend them all;
but the wise masters learn well from a little thing, and from those that are present and lacking, find new works, and nine instruments, to the understanding of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not from members where they are fixed otherwise than according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and that which leaps further than where it enters, is an arrow entering the flesh, and leaping never again.
And if it does not leap now, then let it remain until the flesh is healed inside, and the exit be cleaned;
and also if it is fixed to the bone, and it cannot be removed, leave it so for some days, and move it each day;
and then it will jump, and if it does not jump, pierce around it to all i.e., forest subtle, until the ligaments around are enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back into its place in the body, if it cannot be seen, then try to bring it out completely. And if you feel it, then pull it out with no suitable instrument;
and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow. and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then widen it as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrowhead to what it holds
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrowhead to what it holds if bone is stuck which is embedded in two parts as much as you can and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can pull it out and subtly so that you do not break the arrow, but that you pull it out more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then put it back into its place until the pain is reduced, then treat it, because the extraction is painful. And if the flow of blood goes against you, then administer what we have said about its treatment in this chapter.
and guard yourself from the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put every effort you can to safely remove the arrow without danger.
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form in which he was when the arrow struck him, for it is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot, then put it according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, or where one sees or feels nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in that place:
Cut then there, as long as the pincers can take hold, and then extract it; if it leaps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot be drawn out, leave it there still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, take out the whole shaft.
And if the shaft has fallen, and you see administering a push is helpful, administer one instrument's thrust. So that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then push it out.
and if the arrow is embedded, put one instrument with a pointed tip into it, to help in the extraction.
And if the arrow is encircled, then it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as it should be treated.
And if the arrow strikes in the thigh or abdomen or bladder or ribs, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut into it, then cut.
and guard yourself from cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if necessary is. and take care of it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows are similar to the beak of an eye, and see here the shape:
And they come in many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
of the veins of the common body Of veins from which one heals are thirty-one, from which it has or head sixteen.
That is to say: two veins that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose and the two veins which are in the neck; and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly used are five in each arm.
One is the cephalic, and it is on the inner side of the arm, and the common people call it “vein of the head.” And the middle one is called "bastard", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilica. And the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilica is on the outer side and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the hollow. and it is the one that we drain, which opens manifestly above the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the vein that is between the index and ring finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one of which is below the curvature of the pouch of the left rib; and the second saphenous vein which is in the right ankle; and the vein which is called “ness,” which is in the ankle of the other side;
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The saphenous vein that is after the ears helps with old catarrh and migraines; and the qualities of the saphenous vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the qualities of the saphenous vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then strap the patient's neck to a vice until the two veins appear behind the ears in two lengths depending from the head: who then at your hip, and where you feel the pulse below your hip, if it is feeling;
then take the lancet, and thrust it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein above, and cut and the skin and vein well two times through, and make blood issue as much as you see;
then restrain and bind it, until it is healed;
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for old migraines, and suddenly, and habitual ophthalmia, and to the body of tears sharp to the eyes.
and the qualities of the blood are as I say: and that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and he feels the pulse beneath his right ear and then judges it in terms of;
then gently raise the vein with your right index finger and push the lancet under. and lift the vein upwards, and cover it, just as you have done with the other two veins, and draw blood according to your need.
then unbind the patient, and put your right hand over the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
and then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken about their covering and extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the bloodletting of the cephalic for diseases of the face, headaches, and vertigo.
And the quality of this is that the patient strains their neck by twisting, until the vein appears. Then take the instrument which is called "fousseur", whose form is here:
And put the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see. Then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never again work with a wide flame.
However, it is not proper that the flames be too thick; and heal across because the bone is close, and perhaps break the flames when they are subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in two tear ducts helps the eyes, and to the forehead, and to the cheek, and to the edge around the eye, and to diseases of the face;
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with some rope, as before;
then heal it, and let the healing be through the skin, a little through the long, a little wide, because there is no flesh.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it on cloth, and tie it well.
The vein's healing is good for fever, and for sudden pain, and for facial illnesses, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, and even when it is old.
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his chin to your left hand and take a fine subtle flame, and put it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils for the vein does not open well in this way, and the blood will now begin to flow.
and do not go too far in its depth, and make it bleed according to your need, then tie it up at night, for it is very quickly restored.
The blood of the two guindeges helps in the treatment of the eye, and at the beginning of the measles, and many diseases, and inflammation, and corrosion, and herpes, and scabies.
And the qualities of the blood are that the sick person pulls out his neck under one and the other, as we have said. and let the master be standing above the head of the sick person, and the sick person sit on one seat,
Then heal the vein well long a little widely, then draw blood moderately, or as much is needed;
Then redo the other side in the other vein, then untie the linen, and hold all the veins moderately. so that the patient doesn't strangle; and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of healing the books The bloodletting of veins of the lips above helps in the ulcer in the mouth, and the corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and sores and ulcers.
And the qualities of bloodletting are to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by that they are black, and by that around them veins small black; therefore take both, and if you do not know them, and you are doubtful.
therefore take both, and if you do not know them, and you are doubtful. if take the larger of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein beneath the tongue The vein beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the stricture of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the veins are that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lift the tongue, and look under on each side a vein black:
so feel one and the other, and do not go too deep, because under are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which commonly are bled are felt according to two ways:
or they are pricked at all  1. a single flame martin wide, or olive subtle as you cut trenches, and it is called "anesil"; and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the prominent veins filled with thick, apparent blood, and that contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-shaped flame:
and it is more subtle pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps in diseases that are under the throat, and neck, and breast, and belly.
and it is necessary for the healer to heal wisely, and that he warns himself of the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding comes forth, then it befits him to stanch it, as I have said; And the flame must not prick, but cut like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then you should restrain it, and change another; or you want no vein of it, or you open in its place the vein in the arm; it opens manifestly; and the cup to the knife-like flame, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the sinew, then it is fitting so that you extract the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then sign the place of the incision, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame Anesilic;
and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is of the artery: avoid therefore.
And if you see it rise up high as well as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood of the artery: Hurry then, and put your leg on a length of cloth, then pull your leg up if it has not been pulled, which happens many times.
Bind his arm, and let him so remain, and do not move it the patient; and be in fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if his arm is not set straight, and he feels pain, and the medicine is not present, then tie off the artery if it opens up, because the head of the retraction; and set the arm straight.
And take a piece of fig bark, and make it soft, and take one half and bind it well until the next day.
If the bleeding is stopped, it is well; if it is not, then treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding.
And the stopping of the bleeding is not always achieved in many cases because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The blood from the vein in the middle helps treat blood from the head above, and from the body below. because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the physician to feel with his hand over the nerve that is beneath, and if they are not too much inflamed, and he feels the nerve and he inflates it and the saintes be grieved, and by chance cannot heal
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you feel it with the instrument anesthetized; and push the nerve to your power.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make an incision along the length
The bloodletting of the cephalic vein so aids, that it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes.
And it is proper to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, because it is the safest of all veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
However, it is proper to seek the lighter spot, and do not worry if one fails the first time, and you begin again. And by chance, it swells for some men when one tries the first time, but it does not matter. The qualities of the vein are according to your thinking.
The first thing that you must know about bloodletting is that it is only administered for the sake of preserving health.
and to ward off diseases to come; and that the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins which are known as cephalic, femoral, and basilica; And one must bloodletting at the beginning of Lent, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
And one must bloodletting on the first day or the third, after two or three hours of the day.
Bloodletting which is administered to illnesses has no determined hour, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and in all times.
And it does not behoove to bloodlet children until fourteen years old, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed the old man who has passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema, if he has much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not draw the superfluous and harmful excretions from the principal members;
do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, until they are sober, nor those with dropsy;
And if one warse on after colic passion, and vomiting, and swelling of the belly, and multiplication of labor in woman, and of travail, of wakefulness and of fasting, and that which all virtue, or by thing of the weapon or of the body;
then subtlety the humors, if they are thick, by meats and by drinks and by medicines, if you have their power;
then enter into a bath, if nothing forbids it, to subtlety the blood;
and heal the vein of the pit entrails as we have said;
And guard yourself from work, and from pricking, and from lust, and similar things.
And be bound and joined, and let the hand of the one who is healing be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then stretch the ligament in the middle, for when it is too stretched or pulled, it cannot be corrected properly.
And then rub the place with your hands, until the veins swell up and are felt.
then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then put his finger of his left hand on that vein under its location a little bit where he wants to open so that the vein is not cut and made with iron. For there are veins that are as thick as cords to open, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the cautery on it, it retracts from the cautery, and cannot open the vein, and this is how it happens with those;
and if he works on the vein, if the wound is too tight, for this it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
And if the vein is worked on the first time, it is good; if not, he begins again a little below where it was, if the veins are not inflamed.
And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is afraid, then he leaves it for one or two days, and does not bind up the arm: for perchance abscesses will come; nor enter into a bath, then he begins again the bleeding if it pleases him;
and if the opening is small, or the vein short and you doubt that it will not give as much blood as you see, then pierce in that same opening all the way directly;
and make a little incision, so that the edges are swollen; because this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place swollen, do not begin the bloodletting again, and put a little olive oil on it, because it heals the body from blood, and is better in this case than any other ointment.
And thus administer olive oil in every bloodletting that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and that same action is tripled and bowed of them, when one puts it in its place; so subtle the sinews are and they part when it is too big.
And if there comes to it an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is drained only that time when the opening of the vein is small. if you hurry, and put on it a sponge moistened in water and some heat, and hold it for an hour.
and it is proper that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, then it does not harm it. And if you see, put on no thing of aloes or myrrh mixed with juice of calamint, mint, or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance to the basilica's  health: put therefore your hand on, and if you find the place soft at the pressure of the hand, so is that appearance evil. Avoid therefore that you put on anything of those we have said, for by chance it may lack the artery; but let him I bandage I plaster dry to harden the place, then its care other care, until it is healed.
And treat each one with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it ooze until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is smaller; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And for one who is weak and frail, and needs the extraction of blood, let a wider wound be made, and the flames be wide.
And for one who is feeble, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed them often and little, and you must bleed them by cutting across, not pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from the loss of blood and severance of nerves, and is more useful than bleeding deeply or widely.
And to the one whose body needs bloodletting, it is fitting to give softened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is feverish, treat with blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion,  soak bread in syrup of figs, or in a syrup of aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and a well-scented syrup.
And if he faints during bloodletting, after the exit of a mouthful of blood, it is fitting that he suck broth of meat and subtle aromatic syrup.
And use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to empty his arm, and bleed other times, if it is needed, when he is weakened by much bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And whoever wants to empty his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to bleed from another part, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood inside the body that is already exhausted, and brings fever; so in this case, it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it drips in pellets. since you are aware of all the conditions of health, and place your hand upon his pulse when it is healthy, that death may not come in place of the pains and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it does not behoove you when you see the arm dislocated, and make blood flow a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly upon it; and if it is curved, that he extend the arm completely, for that would be harmful;
but let it be until it heals the second time; or you point it to the tip of the flame, as long as the vein that is frozen should not be pierced from the vein. and put on i. pock of oil re-applied, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, let it be done in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein in the neck because it is composed there.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the bones are red;
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the middle, neither wide nor long;
and be the puncture wide, and bleed well near the joint of the hand, and if without it can issue, then put the hand back into hot water, and leave the blood in the water, until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not put the hand in hot water, because one puts it in more in winter than in summer;
and the vein of this chapter is safer from all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how:
strait the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one sees it; And if the bone is broken crookedly, and if you cut it straight through entirely, it will not cause any harm.
And do not push it too far in, because the nerves are all exposed bare of flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water, if it has become numb in the wound, and cannot be moved.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and wool on top of the vein to keep it covered tightly, and do this for each one.
The sinew of the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I have told you for the right.
The sinew of the sophene is good for all the diseases that are below the body. as many as diseases of the joints, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the qualities of this sinew are that the patient puts his foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it warms. and bind above the ankle joint; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins;
so take then the larger vein, or at the ankle, which seems best.
And if you cut it above the foot, guard the nerves which are below, and cut in a way similar to when cutting into [something]; and let the flame be annealed.
And if it cannot flow out, put the foot back in water, and let the vein drain well.
And if it is necessary to cut the wound a first time, then begin again above a bit, because the blood flow is salty; Do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and then do the same thing from the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of the foot, and its bleeding is good for the pain in the hip, when it is hot blood.
And the qualities of its bleeding are that the patient enters a bath and is restrained above the ankle four fingers in twisting
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then close it in all ways that you can, and across. and it is better that you cut it, for the veins are dry, and it is well supplied with blood by the hands of men.
and it is better that you cut it, for the veins are dry, and it is well supplied with blood by the hands of men. And if you do not find it, then close any vein that opens or on the back of the foot, and towards the lower part, and guard against the nerves;
and make as much blood flow as you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; it is now healed.
Of leeching
Leeches are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and leeching is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this leeching which is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is hot, or cold;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the windpipe below the chin; and the windpipe at the two shoulders; and the windpipe above the hips; and the windpipes in the two arms; and the windpipes of the two legs; and the suction cups on the two ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh
and therefore it does not weaken them as much, as one does with a vein-letting. and it is not suitable to be administered, neither with hot nor cold fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to use suction cups, or out of custom, then we administer them every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and midway, and at any time.
because there are some who, when they need to blow, have heavy head
and they have those who experience bloating and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness around their eyes;
and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed from the gums; and there are some who dream, and see through blood-red mist and corpses and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is removed after.iii. hours of the day.
The bloodletting of the temple helps in the great pain of the head... which comes to the eyes, and it is not right that it should be done after the evacuation of the whole body;
and this ventousation is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic.
and it is not right that those who are of cold complexion should use it, or those who have diarrhea, because this does great harm to them;
and for this reason it is not suitable for the elderly to use, nor those who have or are afflicted with cold diseases.
And those who heal from it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Cupping on the neck is in place of the cure of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is useful to the extraction of phlegm. and to the opening of the channel of the throat, and to all other ailments, and to congestion.
and there it is fitting not to press too hard, for if it holds too tightly, it can cause obstruction in the stomach or heart.
The ventilations of the two ribs of the neck are good for pains in the head, and headache, and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is fitting that you command the patient to spread his hand when putting it, that he does not cut the artery, and does not bring a discharge of blood.
The ventilations below the chin are good for mouth disease, and gum rot, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illness that comes from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins of the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient not to let too much be worn upon it, for its skin is bare of flesh and shows beneath nerves and arteries.
The suction cup which is on the haunches is good for hemorrhoids of the foundation, and for diseases below, and it should be large, and of iron, that it has need to well draw; and perhaps if it were thin, it would break; and in this way it makes great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs are applied openly, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the tumors; and they are placed in the place of the two calves, and of the two ankles, but nonetheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and succeed temperately, and place it firmly, and move it equally, and do not cease to do this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then firm, and replace the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the body, because there are such who have tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to pierce it twice: the first time to thin the way of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to pierce it a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only prick once.
And if we want a lot of blood, we repeat often; and if the vein is thick, pierce it in depth, and the end is that the cords be pierced soundly.
And it behoves him who has thick and hard skin, and who has large pores, that you anoint the places of the cupping glasses with oil appetizing and dissolving. If it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed;
and if it is in the ear, of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the superfluity is large and cold, then take bitter oil, or balm, or dill seed oil, and similar ones.
And if the one whom you are treating has tender flesh and wide pores, then it is not necessary to put any oil there;
but it is necessary to wash after the suction of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or gourd water, or china water, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture, let them rise from rosemary water, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities, they rise from old wine, or buckthorn water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
and it is not necessary to apply cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for one hour or two; and do not sleep after cupping.
and it is necessary for him to worsen when he must be winded and when he is winded. And beware of those who are healed and are choleric, and if their flesh is too much aggravated and inflamed; if it is necessary for them to eat cold things, such as pomegranates and chicory and lettuce at the waist, and similar things;
and minced beans, and boar meat, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, so take syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and quince, and quince seeds and small onions and pigeons.
And on the day that he will feel better, he should drink more than eat.
And it is necessary to give no man at any time thyme or nutmeg before or after the opening of a vein, in order to comfort the main limbs. And let it be subtle [prepared] the wine, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The suction cups that are put on without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the chest and the hips and the hip, because these members do not suffer being hurt on them.
and one does it only in order to draw blood from limb to limb. as we put on the breasts when the milk comes in; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put suction cups on the belly and chest to lessen the limb;
and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
And thus it is done when one puts it on the liver and on the mouse when there is retained wind.
And these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with tepid water.
as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner one fills the suction cup with hot water only, or with water in which herbs suitable to it have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And have two boards of width and half a palm length, and have or costate around the middle one small hole, as for putting in a needle
And let it be of wood, soft facing so that it does not burn the patient when putting it on the limb;
And have in the middle a crossbar of wood or iron, to put a candle enclosed,
and let them be both large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
because the cupping glasses of children are other than those of old people, and of the thin ones than of the fat ones.
And should one thus place this cupping glass upon the limb?
Take the candle of wax or .i. ointment, and place it within the cupping glass opposite the rod which is within the cupping glass, so that the light be at the bottom of the cupping glass so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it upon the limb, and these must be upon the opening that we have said, so that when one wants to, air goes in there, and one removes the suction cup.
and grasp the linen as before, and repeat it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, on no occasion has it a rod or opening, and is not administered except when it is full of air, and is placed upon the limb only for a while.
and this is the form:
Suctions are brought only to limbs where one cannot put suction cups because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar things; and in their naked flesh, such as the two or three, and similar things;
and the qualities of the user are that when you find suctions that are in clear fresh waters without impurities, take them;
and place them in fresh water until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be cleaned by leech and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandages.
and when they are flat, and will fall, if it is their place where one can put a cupping, then put it, because it helps a lot afterwards.
If those are not there, lift the place with ease, then with water, very well, and then bind it.
And if the sores heal too much after the bandages of the skin, then moisten 1 linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the bandage is softened.
and if the wounds are multiplied, put on top pounded vitriol, or salt, and similar things, until they are stretched.
or you put on top half of peeled beans, and let them stay there until they dry out on the spot, then it will stop.
and if you need more, take other bandages.
And if the bandages do not want to be taken, rub the spot with fresh blood, or insert a needle there until the bandages loosen. and then put them above, and as soon as they feel the blood, they burn;
and when you see that they are bleeding, sprinkle on a little powder of aloes and silk ground together, or ashes, they will now stop burning.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear child, that the fools who read from this chapter will never see anything in any of the old books, nor will they ever read a letter from them.
And for this reason knowledge is banished from our land, because I have never found any good one.
And I know nothing else, except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered its science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
And I have shown you in this chapter what is contained within it, and have abridged it at the end, and clearly showed the forms of the instruments that are used, as I have done in these two chapters before.
It is therefore fitting that we say or prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sages put their understanding, and stay on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing prevents it, such as weakness of body, or child, or old age;
or if their strength is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, that is to say cold meats, and mutton and venison, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; so that the patient returns to his first governance he used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or he has viscosity, like wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and belly of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with this nourishment they recover strength and more quickly the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of the old and the decrepit cannot well recover nor mend according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
but has no cure, reset on the broken bone that is large tendons which join and join the limb together, until it forces as it was before; and do not let anything of its work, and for this reason it behoves to feed him with big meats, as we have said.
And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or of the thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go to the outside and others inward, like the point of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go to the outside and others inward, like the point of a pen for writing. And if with fracture, and fracture to a small split all.
And for every kind have its instrument, and its proper tool in the restoration, according to what remembrance comes in its place.
And it is known the fracture of the bone by those that the parts are twisted, and open well outward, and sound to the pressure of the hand.
And when there is no twisting nor sound at the touch, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
but it can also have twisting, or a fissure, or a small fracture. It is not advisable to move it with your hand, but apply the medications that come after here, and then restrain it gently.
And know that the fracture that goes around the joint, and the two parts of which are disjointed, it is now necessary to put them in equal alignment so that the abscess comes together.
And if an abscess appears there, let it remain undisturbed for as long as the abscess is appeased. then put it equal in the muscle that you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of that one where there are pieces; then restraint, as it is fitting afterwards.
And if in the bone it is broken into pieces, if it is two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it is one small member, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you set all with every means the additions in their places in the muscle as much as you can, and keep that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and join well the two pieces of the bone according to the best forms.
And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if it is drawn beautifully and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscesses hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, so chastise well the patient that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, neither turning, nor in any other manner. And guard well that the limb be so assured that it feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain, then it is not well in place, and it behooves to put it in such a disposition that it feels no pain.
For when it feels no pain, then it is not well in place, and it behooves to put it in such a disposition that it feels no pain. and keep it straight so that twisting does not come when it is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in bigness and in form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar ones: so it is fitting to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths;
and those which are thick, such as thigh and leg: it is fitting to encircle them with a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bandages embrace the whole large limb, and restrain it from all parts equally, so that there is no movement;
then tie lighter bandages on top, 3 or 4 according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little at all the bandage, then go above the fracture and restrain less, so that the fracture remains a little apart from the fracture.
and soften the bandage little by little, as much as you grasp a large part of the healthy place, then take another bandage, and turn it around directly above the broken place;
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first place above.
Then put between the splints of linen or cloth, until it is all even, then tie everything above, i.e., with a bandage, and then put your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put on top something that soothes the abscess and removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days.
Then strain above your dressings, and let them be of half a broad cane carefully cut, or of wood from which they make cleavers, or of palm strips, and let them be according to this figure:
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a little larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as is necessary for the limb of smallness or largeness;
then restrain on the splints as you have done at the first hour, then bind above a thread evenly, as in the first hour on the fracture;
more tight is below, less above; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen from fools who do their works with cords of linen twisted, and that is a great error, for the stitch cannot be even if it is too fine, and it does not behoove that there be between each star less than two fingers' width.
And if the patient is chafed by the stitches after the tightening in their health, then put underneath them wadding of linen, or wool felt, so that it does not blister.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I shall say its cure here after.
And know that it is not necessary to straighten all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put splints on it immediately for after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of abscesses appearing hot.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and it is that you take flour that adheres to the walls of the mill, and mix it with an abundance of egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring a fracture in many positions, and even for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take  three parts each of abarris, ladani, enula, asafoetida and gum arabic, and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make it into a powder, and mix it with the white of an egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is good for many men.
Another way of making a plaster that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana .x. grains; myrrh and aloes, ana .viiij. grains; acacia vi. grains; Armenian bole .x. grains, and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer it.
Another way of making a plaster for joints and bones that are out of place, and soothes the pain that comes from it, and the use on broken bones, and sprains: take fresh linen, and moisten it in oil and heat, and put it on the place. This plaster does not restore it back, but it is good to soothe a hot abscess, and remove pain properly.
Another way of making a plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of plaster for the restoration of broken bone and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of verbena, each one part; and grind, and confection with wine, and if the member is scalded, confection with coriander water moist, or water, and use.
Another manner of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the member. Take roots of wormwood, and flax seed, balm, melilot, and sweet flag, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and confection with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its repose.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb for restoration other than what is made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and says it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little hot, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of making a plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and chaff of sheep's wool cut, or feathers of eyes, and marsh mallow, and seal evenly, and grind them, and make a plaster from it and apply it.
And then loosen it a little after, and take care if the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, lack of rest or swelling, then hasten, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take light cloth, and a sponge of sea moistened, and dip it in water, and lift the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is calmed. Then let the member rest an hour, then put on dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a cloth, until you are sure of the hot abscess.
And rest the inflammation of the member, and remove the pain, then begin the thin bandage again, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and gently until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and pain and swelling are completely gone, and you need plaster and bandage, then begin again as you did first.
And if nothing comes to the member of what we have said, then do not unbind it for less than 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7. And at no time leave it untied for 20 days, according to what you see, until the break heals and approaches the joining of the flesh;
therefore restrain it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that no healing can come from there then arises a hot water decoction, all the times that you loosen it, and every third day, and moisten a bit the place
by this work then the healing comes to the limb, and mends hastily those that make foolish mire, who return the member twisted: it is bad, and thus are perilous works, and I see no other thing than to let it be and to work it directly.
of various ways of fracture Many types of fractures are, and diverse figures, and their causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the neck bone all the bone up to the shaft which is below the bone, like made high or post; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "haichire".
Where the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures great or small.
And if there is an impact embedded, or a fissure or of the neck of the bone, or of the head on the bone, or similar things.
And if there is a fracture passing, which approaches to the membrane that is under the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is either great or small.
And if the wound which is rejoined in the bone as subtly as a hair, and is the fissure small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
and if the wound which is made either by striking with stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and makes the piece of bone enter inward, and are the legs like how the blacksmiths do when they forge on the cauldrons; so enters the piece within.
And this happens more to those who have or heads with moist bones, such as that of a child;
And it happens to all these ways of breakage that small pieces are broken off as if they were stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all the ways of fractures by the subtraction on them, and the inquiry at tents, and by the rotten flesh which is on top.
The appearance of the capillary blood vessel is known by this: when one has discovered the bone and rubs it, black breakage appears.
In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the sick person, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and fever ague, and the eyes being watery and red, and other similar things in more dispositions, then he cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unfavorable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it behooves to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone may not rot, and come the accident that we have said.
And if the bone fracture comes as far as the skin that covers the brain, then it behooves you to split the broken part thus: and you must shave the head of the wounded person, and uncover the bone in every way that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can.
and if bleeding occurs when uncovering the bone, or an abscess appears, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with soft cloths soaked in rose oil. and make the wound rest until the abscess has calmed down, and be assured of bleeding; then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done in .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut in a narrow strip in front, and this is the form:
And then put another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of incisions of different sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp at one end, and made of iron; and in working lightly, so that you do not pierce the head.
And if the bone is broken and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it through, so that you administer splints with tarteres, not too deeply so that they do not go beyond the bone of the test, and it must have above the point a margin or circle, that does not let pass the point beyond the bone; and you should have more than one, so that each comes in its place from the thickness of the bone, so that you have splints for all tests; and this is the form of the three types of tarretes:
The qualities for piercing through the broken bone is that you put one tarrete on the bone, and turn to your two until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the tarere back in another place a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with incisors the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have such as tweezers, pliers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the spinal cord.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, it is necessary that you remove the preparation which is remained from the bone to all one other instrument seeming to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tenacious and more subtle than the other incisor;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then gently remove the bones with instruments; then treat the wound with tents and dressings as we have said.
And the other way of working is this one that Galen says, which is drier; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a portion of the bone where the broken part appears, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place underneath the head of this lentil-shaped incisional instrument, for this is its shape:
And do not cut in one direction, and the part is sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone. Then strike with a small mallet upon it, so that you gently chop the bone all around, and take great care of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is caught to the bone, then lightly remove it, because it should be removed easily without pain, and without fear.
And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble that sprain, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, so as to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you start with large razors, and then smaller ones after that, and do not cease doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other capillary and subtle cuts, it is necessary that you administer care according to its location; and this thing is not well-answered by him who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it behooves you to take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; and do this as gently as you can so that you do not harm the wound, then administer a third linen above, and do not tighten it more than it holds the wound alone.
And leave it thus for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer additional medicines, divine but without stinging.
and guard that the wound be well clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor do you let it assemble bowe, for when bowe assembles upon the cloth of the brain, so it runs and hurts, and happens to the patient great malice; for when one puts upon the said thing biting, so it bites from above.
Take guard then, if no bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so is it doubtful without doubt.
And if nothing black comes from it except for the medicine that one has put upon it, that it may have virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in glue one drapel, and put it upon the said thing; Then the cure of manners of cures which it is convenient, until he be cured.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the two bones above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you put your little finger or point of your finger into the bone, and put each fracture inside with your index finger, and with the thumb on the outside, until the bone returns according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the leg and the bone cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a stick a little thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another one like this, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has calmed, then bandage to the head of the leg with ten cloths of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bandage one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the leg.
And they say that any restorer must soak the bandages in butter and change them every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be soaked with a confection of hen's egg white and powdered millet; then leave the bandage until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes one puts goose feathers in their place, and if so, a single piece of cloth is draped over, and the bandage stays put, and it blows on the patient; do whatever you want.
And if an abscess comes to the new while you are working on it, then put a cloth or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a teaspoon of diaquilon.
And if an abscess comes to the boil, put a plaster on it from outside of sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, and bind it not too tightly.
And if the bone fracture is small and broken into many pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then suture the fissure, and treat it with things that bring flesh together, and soldering, like plasters and ointments that are suitable for this.
And if it has no wound inside the bone, then treat it with tents, and put cotton wool into it as long as it is healing.
of the jaw fracture
When the jaw is broken below, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only so much, and is not broken in two, except for the cartilage inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left jaw, then put your index finger from the right hand, and push the fracture inward lightly, and hold it with the other hand outside, and make it even.
And if the jaw fracture is dislocated into two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a break, then restrain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw cerote, and place on it one double drapel; and place on the drapel a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and put a plaster on top, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg or flaxseed flour, after you have removed the cerote; and put a light linen cloth over the plaster, and if the plasters dries, and the patient’s disposition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward none of the bone pieces are removed; so subtly remove them with instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, then enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none remaining, then close the wound if it is wide, and put on one suitable plaster for this purpose, to prevent flesh from forming, until it is healed.
of strength The fracture breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each fracture to your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor displacement.
And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round ball of cloth, or wool, and be as large as your need; and gently lift the bone, and tighten the ball with your hand, so that you put each fracture together as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the forceps out by force because it comes embedded, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back, and put under the shoulder one oreillier in the middle, and push the ministers' shoulder down, until the bone of the forceps is raised.
And then address the fracture to your two [hands], and if you find it shattered, then it is necessary that you split it up; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any elevation, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the forceps this instrument, to guard the syfac.
And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all grooved, and be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then apply the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and put it on top.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incisions, is that you put on the bone plaster made from ground flour and beaten egg white, and put light dressings on top, and place a sphere under the buttock, if you need it; then take a very wide bandage one palm wide, then put one double cloth on top of the dressings and plaster; then take a subtle board three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged area so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage around the neck, and below the healthy shoulder, and below the injured shoulder; and move each part, and when you see that the sling holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, so reward each day, and when the ligaments loosen, so restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps i. small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the shoulder higher; so it will lighten the fracture of the arm by lifting the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, until xx days.
then restart the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and restrain it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in at most xxviii days, and in fewer to some men.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or wide place does not come together and is not united except by touch; therefore, according to the figure of the fracture, it is aligned and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with plenty of egg, and light bandages, and put on one double cloth; then put on a broad and thin splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the splint touches at any place of the shoulder, so use that hair of linen bandage so that the splint sits evenly; and then restrain it with a whole wide band firmly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the joint every day; and every time it softens, tighten it, and put back the splint if it is out of place, and lie the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five, And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that is set lightly.
And if a piece of bone sticks out ahead and not under the heart, so do it above, and the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the arm to soothe abscess hot.
of the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the outside. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines to the outside, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of support, and thirst, and perhaps vomits blood, and opens the joints in the broken bone, and he feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and put one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and he brings the sides of the two bones together with your hands, and carefully try to set them in every way as much as you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plasters and bandages over the fine skin, or a light cloth such as gauze, and wrap it in one bandage, and tie it above the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the band around to the back, and tighten it evenly, and reward each hour the patient’s limb, and if it softens, tighten it; and if it is necessary to untie it, because of corrosion or itching which comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hasten, and untie it, and wipe the plaster away, and treat what has come there in ways of cure; then put back the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only for that reason because they are brittle; and one feels it well upon inquiry to both sides.
And the restoration is that you put equal the break, as it befits. And then put the plaster, and restrict with a splint, if you have need.
And if the breaking of ribs is declining inwards, the patient feels very great pain and sharp pain, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pricks the membrane; and besides pains, and coughs and vomits a large planty of blood, and it is of grievous health, and the ancients have placed great importance upon it.
And if there are those who say it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to drive out the wind.
We do not do this, except for hot abscesses if they have not yet come. And if it has come, then heal it.
And they say none of us put suction cups on the place to suck out fluid, and that seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cups draw out the superfluities to the place for the disposition of weakness.
And they said to you of which one must cover the place with soft wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the layer around, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone that pricks the fabric, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut above the broken rib's place, and it is necessary to put underneath one instrument to ward off the shaft; and then one must drill the bone, and gently draw (it), and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with plasters, until it is healed. And if an abscess comes, then put soft cloths in rose oil, and put on top of the place; and cure as long as the place where it is necessary for the abscess, and be lying supine on his ribs where it must, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and he cannot move them or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortally wounded in more ways than one, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pulled and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if care is taken of him.
And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take heed if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in their hands, and on his back there is a windiness and expulsion without volition; and when he is laid on his belly, he expels involuntarily. And when he is laid on his back and wants to straighten up, he cannot. Know that he is mortally wounded: do not labor much in his cure.
And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is lighter.
And the cure is that you reheat it if there is an abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is soothed; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain, as long as he is well. And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure it with ointment that promotes healing, until it is well; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow", then you put your fist of your left hand in there, and put it equal to the other hand as best you can, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do this again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is well.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there should have been a little weakening at the top; and it is made long, and slopes to the outside, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and numbness, and swells that which breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the shape of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, then put equal the fracture, until it is to natural shape.
And if the fracture is long, or it slopes inwards, then make the patient lie on their belly, until the restoration of that fracture be apparent to you. And when you have put it equal, put it on the plate, then put on a piece of staff or of wood, and restrain the bandage so that it does not move; and employ the place below the ribs until the wound is healed.
And command the patient that he sleep on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if abscesses come to those [areas], do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two ends to two ropes, and bend them upwards, and place the patient on one seat; then put the broken arm onto the stick as far as it comes to the armpit, and make a curvature of the stick in the middle, then place on any heavy thing or the ministers extend it downwards; then put the patient's arms together with his hands, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds that which is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below by one rope, and extend each to his side.
And if you see that the extraction is more distant, hold back I. the linen under the fracture and on the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put I. a linen medium under the seat, and another towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, then it is necessary to put I. a linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the top and on the outside; then put the fracture back, as it is necessary, and hold it, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess happens to come, do not hold it back for up to seven days, and put on a linen cloth moistened in oil of roses, until the abscess is appeased; then hold it back, and the manner of holding it back is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the bandage, and hold back on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place, unless anything prevents you, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone is not moved, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture three widths on each side; then hold back on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less in removing.
And if you see the position of the stars, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess hot, so let it remain tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine every three days the bandage, that itch or swelling does not come to the place, or the inflammation can not come to the limb for that it is too swollen. If it heals, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, then do not untie it until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool evenly, and examine every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bandages be softened; if it heals by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put, in such a manner that the food is at first thin; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarse. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days of all; and then one must untie it and administer baths and medicines of ointment to heal the place. And if the constriction is bad and obstructed, then delay untieing for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «fossil», because one is small, and that is the one that follows the socket; and the other is large, and that is the one that is below, towards the small thigh; by chance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small one, and by chance andui together.
When the small fossil is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together. If it is the small fossil that is broken alone, it should be gently extended, and put straight.
And if it is the large fossil, it should be constrained more strongly; and place it on one cushion, and hold the socket of the hand higher than the others, and the small thigh lower than the other thighs, and let the patient lie crossed upon himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the below part of his hand, or at one level, and one other minister at another above. And then put the mirrors straight, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture the pieces are broken, then place each one in its place, and if any are detached that prick the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, do as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then take the cure.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses arise, then glue  i.e., a cloth bandage of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft; and bind i.e., the bandage above subtly, until the abscesses are calmed. And then remove the cerote, and put on the plaster of ground flour with an abundance of egg yolk, then put the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be slightly more outwards, and a little wider than the others; and know that it should have six splints or braces in more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and restrain above the fracture more than elsewhere, and every day less apart, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not too hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligament after a few days. And if any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you rise the member with hot water, until the itching is appeased; and let the limb not be allowed to rest. And then begin the tightening again, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, follow the instructions.
And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it so for some days, until the numbing comes, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unwrap it until twenty days, or until the skin is soft, then let him put his hands on his neck and keep his neck straight, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this sprain is restored in thirty days or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and at our two bones there are few fractures, and they come only with many folds.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or folded, it behooves the patient to sit crossed-legged and straight in front of him; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the minister's broken bones, and place them equally, as much as they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come; then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the bottom near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient to tighten it to his broken palm; then strap it with a long cloth, and let the splint be of heartwood as big as the palm of the hand, and strap it, as much as it is necessary.
And if the fracture is at the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint above, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and make the bandage between the two tight.
And if the fracture comes to any of the bones of the two [arms], if it is a dislocation, put it straight, as it should be; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, so that it does not move; and if the fracture is in the other bones, such as in the index finger or one of the others, put it straight, and tie it with the sound bone which is after; or you tie them together in one [bandage], whichever is best, or put on a splint above, like a poultice; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and cure those who come to it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is thus made: one above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends their limb to its side equally; and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, one limb shall be towards the groin, and the other limb below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, then one limb shall be beside the knee, and the other extension downwards; then put the splint on the bone with both hands, until it is according to its natural form, and then put the bandage and plaster, unless an abscess comes.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it be appeased then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in this manner. It behooves you to encircle the fracture with a bandage, that is, a hard double in two or three, and leave the superfluities there, then turn the leg until the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put one long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and make the head of the thread go up; then turn back on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip with pieces of cloth to put an equal tightening, then begin to tie in three or four turns above the fracture; and as you go higher above the fracture, and less tighten it; then take the two ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and bind three splints that are above, then raise down to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that there comes neither abscess nor swelling nor any other semblance.
And if it happens, untie it and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, it behooves to remove them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it behooves to cut the place open and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no time is the hip broken thus if one puts splints on it, as in the shoulder or arm; however, in this restoration thus made, the patient does not feel pain at all.
And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of constitutions.
of the road of the knee
Know that in the road of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure, or one rupture, and has to all wound, and without wound, and it is felt well by everyone.
And the restoration is as follows: one puts it even that which is rounded to its sides, as long as it is assembled move; then put the splint, and there you put a round steel, if you need it, and restrain it as it befits, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other fractures, such as a hot poultice and similar things; so put at each accident what befits it, until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are .ii. bones, by reason of which one is called 'mustelz' and the other 'foscile'; and all fractures come as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
And if the bone called 'subtilz' is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well; and it turns under. Therefore administer an extension, and put it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it is necessary if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to its virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages of woven rope that encompass the leg on one side and the other, and be of the length of the leg from the knee down below; then wrap in two layers one bandage above and below, and bind it in the middle as well, and at this point the leg will not be able to incline to the right or to the left, and thus is well; and no one administers one stick along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and place it on the leg to ward off movement, and properly this is made in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, in order to see if there is an abscess hot or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come never a fracture and to two pock, and there have been only certain in more dispositions.
And if there come the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to go, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it so that they return to their places; then put the plaster and bandages on top, and under the belly of the foot a small board a .ij. palms wide, then restrain the foot firmly, and when you have wrapped it in cloths and other things which you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, untie the ligature, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one finger width wider, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and strain it well. And if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it be standing on the head of the table above the belly of the foot so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, since we have said; and secure each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the hand
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit with her legs spread wide open, then incline it towards the back part, and be held from behind; then fill the cavity of nature with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then turn the woman over, and lift her back up little by little, and thus the cotton will come out until it reaches the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days or so: then the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cane to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the cane forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside; nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like this for several days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said about the hip bone; and these fractures close to those who put their study and use into it, and understand my book. Because a fracture signifies in more ways the right way of restoration: therefore listen.
In the case of a broken branch, take a goose's throat and put it in the branch; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for someone who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to them.
And if the wound heals, then keep applying a dressing of vitriol, if you have nothing else, and then immediately resume restoring the fracture that same hour or that same day, unless an abscess forms.
And if an abscess forms, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess is quieted, and do not touch it for the third or fourth days, because you would cause a bad accident.
And if the broken bone is appearing above the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to place it lightly with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extensions is not ready for you to put it even with your hands, then take the instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. digits or .viij. long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this it is necessary for the smith that he imprints .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and one pock thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and let it be acute at the front, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche," so that the curved head must be put upon the top of the visible bone; and butt at once, until it rejoins, and be even one against the other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot well take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, until the instrument has hold.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either incisor or saw, to your power; then clean that which is remaining in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So do as much as it is in its place, then moisten one cloth in black wine stiptque, and properly if it is in the same state; and do not put on the wound any cerote or other thing where there is oil, so that it does not bring forth rot and corruption; then administer ointments when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and be well warned that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times have fools done this, and brought upon the patient death or corrosion at any time; and let the strainings be more soft and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents will come, as we have said, and you find pain at the place, then it does not befit to put on ointments; but envelop around, instead of ointments, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two an ingression bowe to the wound, then remove that which you have put on with all wine, and there put healing ointment for wounds, such as ointment tetrafarmaçon and similar.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be pulled apart in such a manner that the bone goes down lightly.
And if each day passes, and it cannot heal but goes back in bone, you know that there are small pieces of bone, therefore it is necessary that you cover the wound with a cloth tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula comes at the place, or another manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it, according to what it says in this chapter previously. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip bone or shoulder, and similar large limbs, do not treat it, because many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will heal by itself after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just leave it.
of boils that come from the swelling
We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and a bad thing to see is the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot do the member its natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh: if he administers medicinal astringents like aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acai, and similar things, in the same way that you pick any of these things, or all together, and confit them with astringent wine or with egg white or with basil; and put them on the knot in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not release it in hands for days; and then loosen it, and begin another one, as long as the knots are removed; or you constrain it on a piece of wood well made; because the properties of wood is that it removes all the swellings from the members; and if the knot has already become hardened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above it, and make the superfluity appear; or you raise it with any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healed.
When the broken bone is restored, and afterward the limb remains weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bandages, and it could not come to the nursing of the member; or for multitude of dressings; or for too great movements, not at its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give him joy and ease; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts to the great nursing, and the dressing often of water teed, until the nursing comes to the member; and returns to its natural figure.
of the limb twisted after the health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodules and the torture are fresh, then it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and melilote, and similar things; and make i. a softening plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the viscous of vismalve, and you cook it with the fat of geline or oil of sisament, and make a plaster on top; or you take fatty figs, and grind them with chaff of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And at no time is the nodule removed by rubbing continuously and lengthwise with wet hands. And let there be administered movement to the limb every hour.
And if the distortion is old and hardened, like stone, and need be removed with iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle incision lightly; and put cussons and study into the care.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation comes from a joint leaving its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is ill-figured, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to any, if it should now be returned without bracing.
For if one delays, then it swells the limbs, and perhaps if one puts it back into place with pain; for this reason, it is not fitting to move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings on lameness and other pains;
Nevertheless, when this happens, if you have bled the patient then let him, until the abscesses are each calmed; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then reset it gently, and cure each member as it comes into its place.
And I have ordered the chapters on the dislocations of the head to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens sometimes that the jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both sides are according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit removed from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang towards the cheek, and cut off the saliva of the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with the speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by more than one disposition.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it carefully, and do not delay;
and in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb pocket with one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be outside, to put it even; and command the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in every direction.
And the minister puts it even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back broken, even if it is the two mandibles together, put them in hot water and oil until you gently reset them; do not neglect bringing it back together as we have said.
And when they are brought back equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, put a wet cloth on top, made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft bindings;
and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two cushions, so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but take light food until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are healed;
And then he must gently move the jaw and not strain to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the jawbone is well set and healed.
And if the two jawbones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not converted to their places, then fevers and accustomed sores come, and perhaps a rupture of the belly, and perhaps a vomiting of clear phlegm.
And when you see this, then know that it is pernicious; and many times die those who have it, within 8 days.
Of the fork
The lever cannot dislocate from within the side of it and of the bone, and is dislocated only once outside, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies wholly on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain.
And the bone that is towards the shoulder cannot be dislocated; if it does not, and if it dislocates once more, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And thus in the same way bring back the bone of the shoulder when it is dislodged from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is when it is dislocated to the part of the seat down below; and the second is to the part of the breast; and perhaps it is dislocated upward, but this happens little.
and it is not dislocated behind for the shoulder, and it is not dislocated inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated downward towards the seat, especially to those who have little flesh, because in these it goes quickly out; to those who have enough flesh, it comes out with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And perhaps in some men there happens a percussion or fracture, and it inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, it is necessary that you examine it carefully until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it is pulled down towards the hip, and makes a difference between the injured shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear distinction between them. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were one piece; and the patient cannot bring their hand back to its place, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, then it is not concealed, because you find it clearly touching.
and this way of dislocation is not otherwise to be brought back, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person up, then put their hands under the seat, and lift the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it down; so it will come back gently.
And if it does not come back as we have said in a few days afterwards, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister administers ointment softening and soothing, such as a decoction of aloe and fennel and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then the sick person should be laid on their back, and put under their seat a cloth of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of his foot on the cloth, and lift the shoulder with care, and pull gently the hand of the sick person.
And other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; that shoulder comes back now, and if you see it so reset it according to this manner.
And it is that you make present one man who is bigger than the patient; and be straight toward the rib, and put his shoulder under the ass of the patient, and raise the ass upward, so that the patient hangs in the air. And other ministers pull the hand of the patient down toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, so weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation comes back now.
And reset it also in another manner: and it is one long stick stuck in the ground, whose head be as a pistol, and not too thick nor too thin; then be put under the patient, but that he have drapes of cloth above, and the patient be standing with his long of the staff; then be stretched his hand down on the other side form, and the joint will return to its place quickly
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take i tison of ii bras of great and iiij. deux of wide, which has the chief reont for musk enter in through under the assle, according to this form:
then tie above the chief of the staff drapes below, that the staff does not pierce the patient, then put it under the assle of the patient; and extend his arm on the staff of the long, and tie the auxiliary on the staff, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm upon i. eschillon of a ladder of the wide, and be stretched his hands down, and be let the body hanging from the other part: the joint will return now.
And when it is in place, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that you put under the assale a sphere of wool even, then put the emplastrum sprinkled with powder of the mill, with incense and aubun of an egg, on all the shoulder and around, then strain it under the assale carefully, and turn the linen on the emplastrum, and embrace the hand to its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is strengthened, because it will heal more quickly; and then move more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place because of moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cauteries to three places, as it is shown in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all these things, and it unties after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation that is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers in another place; and cure as long as it is sound.
And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient to bathe many times, until that pain is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the joint
Know that the joint of the elbow is dislocated in places, and returns to places; and it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, because it can be seen well and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the elbow of the sick person with the healthy one, if you can see it clearly. Because the joint is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as an abscess would come; because if it were to come from an abscess, it would be painful to bring it back; and by chance it cannot be brought back at all, even when it is behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
And the restoration is like this, when it can be brought back, that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms are spread, and the hands do look according to the knife around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm at the root of the palm the knife which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then when you have enveloped a double long and wide cloth;
And when the one looking after sets the joint with his hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then puts the joint together, until it returns.
And when it is in place, he puts a dry plaster with egg yolk on top, and holds it together, and bends the arm to the neck of the patient, and leaves it for several days, then unties it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, he unties the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint isn't well set, you begin the plaster and the bandage again, and leave it thus for several days, until it is firmly placed; then unties it.
And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, you bathe him and rub him well, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fleece of fat sheep, then leave it for i. day and one night, then remove it, and let him enter into the bath; And when he sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the nail back on, and then go into the bath; and thus do it twice or three times, until he is healed; and if you see that it moves, put on linen cloth moistened warm with butter, and hold it; then it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the place does not swell, or that there comes a hot abscess.
And the putting back is that you place the sick hand on a board, and extend the minister's hand, and he looks at it equal, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it comes back.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; therefore put the sick person's back of his hand on a board to extension and putting back. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, put the sick person's back of his hand on the board, and he puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is well.
If not, if you are putting poultices of soothing plasters on the abscess, and leave him so without recommencing.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint remains twisted.
And does not harm the patient unless while the hand is numb and cannot hold anything at all: therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other means except to restrain by fire cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then restrain it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then soak it in hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the hips of the hand
No times are dislocated the hips of the hand on each side, no times to the back of the palm or to the belly;
therefore are the hips and push the dislocation to your pouches until it comes back, then support the head of the hip, and lean it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and leave it for two days, and then put it straight that day; and do not tie it, as we have said, and untie it every day, and make it move, and tie it again. And do this often, until it is tight
and also do so, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do so, when it is dislocated elsewhere.
of dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are more dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the joints jump out without wanting to, and it cannot be held, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one.
And many times the shoulder moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilbositez":
The cure of this is that you return to the child if the gilbositez came from childhood; if there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, where there is little profit in all.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
I say that in the swelling that comes to the breast before, there is nothing neither feeling.
and also that which comes straight in two ribs, and one cannot cure besides that one properly that comes on the back, as I say;
and it is that the patient be stretched on his face in one even place, and have strain below him, that he does not move;
then put one tinder at the head in earth forming, and another at the feet, and tie a linen thread under the shoulders of the patient, and another one at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and the minister knows the ligaments, one to the head and the others to the feet, among the two tendons.
and be well closed, the tendons as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine forming, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of 3 arms long, and place it under the part, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the part, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mire his feet on the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, then do it to the turner who turns by hand.
And is that you put 2 rods to the head of the sick man from one arm of great, and toward the feet 2 others, and have between each rod, open and below, a palm's breadth of length;
and have in each rod 1 pierced, where the turner passes through, and be the rods firmly in earth so that they do not move; and between each 2 rods have 1 turning rod, on which the linen turns, and have in 2 turning 2 small rods of a palm's length, to turn the turner;
and then tie the linen which is among the axles to the turner toward the head, and the other linen toward the feet to the other turner, and each of the ministers turns its turner to all the linen, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of three fingers long, that extends to the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
And if any thing comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of plank,
and sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocations; and it is the bone which opens, for that reason one should not have presumption there; by chance would come death.
of the hip dislocations
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only through dislocations, and not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and a little dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the sick than the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend his knee to the fire; and it is the part that is swollen below with hot abscess, because of that the head of the hip comes there.
And the sign of him to whom it comes in fever, is that this accident is contrary to these before.
And the sign of him to whom it happens in front, is that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and he retains his urine, and swells his groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it happens behind, is that he cannot spread his knee nor bend it, and his leg is more twisted than the other, and his groin is softened, and the head of the hip bone is in its place below the ribs.
The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you regard whether the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its disposition, then there is no need for cure; and there is no need for him to have presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of .iiij. manners of dislocation, so haste that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perchance it will return, and has no need of other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare .i. minister strong, and extend the leg strongly with .ii. hands, or with .i. linen that be tied upon the knee; and another minister stretches his hand above in such a manner that he thrusts his hands below his armpits, then tightens it with a linen strap upon the hip; and another one holds the head of the linen;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the earth at once, and remains hanging.
This manner of extension is common to four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not so, it is necessary to pay attention to its appearance. When the dislocation is in the center, you must place the patient on his healthy side, then put a linen cloth over the root of the hip, and the part below the groin, then extend the linen upwards towards the groin, and towards the force.
Then, take other assistants to hold his arms, and embrace the large part of the affected hip, and extend it outwards in this form: now it will return to its place. This manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the sick person together with a strong linen strip above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let it be suspended by the top of a staff, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the groin, and let other ministers stand with the sick person who firmly embrace the groin, for now the joint returns readily.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the sick person lie down as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and restrain one linen strip on the affected leg properly, and also on the foot.
then put two sticks, one at the head and one at the foot, then place one stick between the legs of the patient to form it; and have a plant of wet cloths around it so that the patient doesn't get cold, then extend each minister towards him, and he puts equal to his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeity, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the leg as much as possible and according to what I have said; and put his pain to be on the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and bring the end towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the patient down, nor raise up the ground, but it is necessary that he be as if his hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about the laying of the .ij. hips; and be on his face, and the strap extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint to the table;
and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, and put on the splint, and the strap of a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
and rest for three or four days, then unstrap it, and put the splint back on; and if you see that they are even, strap it as before, and leave it for three more days; then unstrap it, and let him walk well, as long as the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not stop at his hip, know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg as much as he can, and place your back against his hip, and put his foot on your feet;
Then take his knee in your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will be able to move his leg lightly to his hip.
And put the plaster on top, and make him rest his leg against his hip, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then unbind it; and let the patient not work at all, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels is sometimes sprained, and sometimes dislocated completely, inside and outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender at the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction is light, and one should gently extend it with one's hands when it is only sprained.
And when it is dislocated completely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him by one minister beside the leg, above the ankle;
then treat the foot to yourself with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then push it upward, and beautifully put the foot up high;
and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is well; if not, begin the work again, for it will return;
and if it cannot return like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and put one stick firmly in the ground between his thighs, and tie bandages around it, so that it does not move the patient;
Then make the ministers hold the hip, and other ministers extend their foot to his hands or to i. liien, that he tie on the neck of the foot; Then extend each minister evenly, and the straps be even between the hips of the patient to hold the patient when one extends him.
Then put the mirrors even on the dislocation to their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return smoothly.
And when it is at point, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and strain firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the bonds are not too tight.
Then let him leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments soften, strain it again; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient from moving for four days. And if he goes before this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes to this place, then you must soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them well without effort, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or of the foot, it is fitting that you make the patient sit on one, that is, a level place or on one, that is, a table completely straight, and put your foot on what is apart of these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is aligned, and there is nothing apart, then put under the sole of the foot a table at two spans, then strain it firmly, and leave it three days, then untie it; and let him rest, until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, nor too bold;
And use at the beginning of things soothing to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope for health; And when you see hope in it, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess may come to a head.
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess heat, and treat the wound as necessary, with dried ointments.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture, and small bones are dislocated, set the bones, and do what we have said in simple ailments.
And guard yourself from entering into a path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body. Amen
