O ye, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the end of the science of medicine altogether with its fulfillment, and have made the end through its expositions and through its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery."
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all, so is the science perished and cut off, and there is nothing left of it but the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or it seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordination of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and of abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and of preparation of them, as much as it is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is elongated. And it is necessary for him who undertakes it to ascend in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations of vessels, and to have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and of the moving and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the things said before, may take care that he does not fall into error and that he does not harm people; so that I have seen many times more than those who engage in this science and abandon their science and lack experience.
For I see a foolish man who cauterizes an abscess from scrophula or the neck of a woman, and cauterizes the arteries of the neck; for that reason so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I see another surgeon who treats a stone from a man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took it out with the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat it, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
And I saw another mire who took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the mire full of ignorance strained the fracture over the wound with tight ligatures, and did not let any ointment on the wound, and left it so; and he commanded him that he should not untie it; and stayed so long that the leg was entirely swollen and the foot and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I untied it so it was in peace and he felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and it could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member as long as the members were all lost.
And see, i. another sore that bursts an abscess, and then inflames by the wickedness of its lord.
Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not befit that one touch it with iron unless in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
For which it is necessary that you watch over yourself, so that foolish people may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the diseases fearsome of grief health; and remove your arms from those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on bad illnesses unless you are called a foolish person."
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and are the chapters ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and the implements of cautery, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and probing, and of cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and are the chapters ordered, and the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and are ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus as we remember of the work, it behooves me to speak of the quality of aid and of the nuisance of each complexion.
I say that the quality of aid and of the nuisance, is the most lengthy discourse and subtle science and the secret answers; and of this speak the most sages, and agree to this; and I suffice myself their words, because I fear the length.
I say that cautery aids universally to every complexion where it has matter, for two complexions: that is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexion together with matter, some said that cautery is great aid; and the other said the contrary: that cautery is not good for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it must not be cured by heat from a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and says he who says the contrary that cauterization makes great help to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this word. For I have found it many times by experience.
And in all ways, let no one intervene except he who has experienced it and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauteries and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and the space of time; of other complexions we have little fear, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the people gathered and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of more secret cures and greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and comes not out further than to the member which is burned, and does no harm to another member.
The hot medicines come from one member to another in moving, and bring to the member diseases of grave healing; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was upon the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I lose to you the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time the cauteries should be made, and how much they are to be pricked.
And I say that the cautery is convenient in all times, because the harms arising are subdued by the aid of the cautery; and also if the cauteries are for necessary pains outside and until when they cannot wait for the time that greater malice may come to the limb.
And never think, dear son, as the foolish ones do; for the illness which is healed by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because the cauteries are nothing but a medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors which are the cause of pain, and it is better than medicine for the hastiness of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
And a certain thing is that illness comes at times according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; and they are assembled in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in their place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauteries of lead for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and it is so; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it is cauteries the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any illness and they do not work, then we administer the cautery, and it works. Therefore it appears well that cauteries is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more powerful than iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the lesions from cautery do not cause decay, but that is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cautery of gold works more than iron, as they say.
And nonetheless when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know whether it is heated by the color of gold, and it cools too soon; and if one heats it too much; so it does with fire; and thus there are enough impediments.
And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made appearing in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, for that the way might be easier to find.
Of olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two kinds of it done because of a disease called “soda,” and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all diseases that come from cold like paralysis and stroke and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine, making the head liquefy three or four times, according to what the virtues and the age and the custom of the patient can endure; and then raise the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and place his hands on his hips; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers come, if it bleeds then extinguish the cautery which is called "olivare", for this is the form:
And put it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand up and down turning; then lift your hand gently, and look at the place if you see the bone that is small; and if you do not see it, then begin the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; after take one pinch of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for three days; after put a wet cloth in butter; and leave it until the burn is gone; after cure the wound with ointment that is called «tetrafarmaçon», until it is healed.
And the ancients said, that when the wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason they helped to open it.
And some of these said that one must leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then to set what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other that one should leave the cautery thus, and press so strongly that it lowers the bone as much as a spindle that women put in their spinning wheels for that the humors might issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; after which one should cure and soothe.
And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in certain men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I ought to leave them; for the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more salutary and more useful to me, and from this use I work therefore in ensemble salvation.
of the ancient pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbs and pills that are called «cochie», and of purging of head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not good.
Take ward if the shoulder of the sick person is of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold; therefore cauterize it below that cautery that we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called «vasselz»; and there is one there in which one puts ventouses; and lightly hold your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it later; and it behooves that the cauteries of the horns be thinner than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it extends to the eye, and the neck is purged by medicinal purges, and one has done the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this profits not: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine hot and of fire.
The cauteries of hot medicine are that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the husk and cut it 1 pock as 2 fingers' width, and then place it on the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can put the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it will be placed there so lie and restrain it well and leave it thus for 12 hours; and then untie it and treat the wound fiercely with garlic, and leave the wound thus for 2 days or 3; then put on a cloth soaked in butter as long as it covers it.
After the ointment cure until it is healed; and if you see this do any of the burning medicines that I have written or doze treatment of burning medicines.
The fire cautery is made thusly. Heat the cautery, as it has this form:
And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clo, or it has .i. pock of curvature, and in its middle, a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and press the fire lightly, until half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and raise your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and runs an abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and place it on the spot for .iij. days; then put cotton moistened in butter, and then cure the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at its entire point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet ancient.
of migraine
When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron do not benefit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called “cultellare” until it is white; and thus rule over the painful place a line of half a finger’s length, and withdraw your hand once, and restrain yourself that you do not cut the artery and that you do not come near the bone; and guard the jaw so that it does not move when one puts it in, and the nerve does not feel only that which is mute and that spasms does not come to the patient, and guard against bleeding from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and especially to him who does not know about it, and who is not a student and has experienced; and leave the work half-way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not benefit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two points; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
from the pain of ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then use this cautery which is called 'point', because of which its form is:
After prick all around the ear of the sick person, or at the two if the pain holds in both, and distance yourself a little above the root of the ear after you have marked the place to engrave; and make ten points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torment which must be cured by cautery is not worse than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make cautery on the appearances that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
When you cure this appearance of torment which moves from phlegm of the eyes and purgings of the head and gargles, and these are not enough, then it behooves you to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a poke of fire on the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery from the top of the ear above a bit below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cautery there until half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the appearance of the cutellaire that we have put before, but it is a bit more subtle and it behooves you that the knife be a bit larger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it be healed.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is fitting to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; afterward raise the head of the patient all up, and put on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the treatise of plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: if I do as I have said.
If he is healthy thus, it is well; and if he is not, make to him three cauteries from the middle of the head downwards to the neck, and have a space between each cautery two of thickness; and cure it as the others, and if you see it joining, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, two others on the two horns, and cure it until it is healthy; and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" as I have said before.
from the cold of the head It is necessary that the head be purified of herbs and what we have said before; after which anoint the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far, make four cauteries on the spine of the back; and leave it until the most of the heart is burned, and lift your hand; after that cure it until it is healthy, and let the cauteries which are called "olivare" as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to temper the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have said in the section when the patient is great and suffers from a lot of medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot suffer it, make gargarisms and chewing tempering the brain often with well-cooked meats; afterwards, he places a crown in the middle, and makes 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, make cauteries as I have said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the humidities corrupted and phlegm thick, then you cauterize with these cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and the body of the sick is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After you have raised the head of the sick person; after make one torteil of linen well made, as well as one circle, if you put it within the head; and the sick person sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and it is worth mixing with butter of sheep ancient; and the heat to fire temperately, so that the two when he puts it may suffer; after empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the sick person each week once with other good government, until he be healthy.
Or if you see the person cauterizing, make more points all over the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then put on cotton moistened in butter and lard of geline.
of the opening of the eyes When the opening of the eyes comes first according to the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient things purifying the head, and guarding it from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
After that, command him to turn his head back, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descent of the opening is to the 2 eyes together, or 1 if the descent is in 1; and cut all cauteries through all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, then restrain it as best as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in incision the caution how to stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or heater below the two bones behind.
Of the course of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head's outside; and one sees that it is superfluities cold phlegmatic, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the awe descending to the eyes: 1 cautery removes the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or heater below the 2 bones; and if there is need more, so it cauterizes wisely above the eyebrow to all 1 small cautery.
Of the course of tears from within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit, then give the patient 3 cups of wine; after which let him rest his head, and make a cautery or middle of olive cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called “clavilis” on the two wrists, one below the hair; and guard yourself from the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery called “clavilis”:
When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called “olivare”. This is its form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
The hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the eyelids, and prick the eye, and one does cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and even, then place the patient in your healthy; after draw on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like as the leaf of the myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign beside the hairs; then put cotton moistened in the white of an egg and muslin of persillion on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, that the hairs be burned in the place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised at the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave thus .iij. days, then put cotton moistened in butter as long as the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment as long as it is healed.
And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on the same place as you did first; and if the hairs are withered, so cauterize until the paper be raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
The cauteries of burning medicine is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the form of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live coals, of each one .3., and grind together well; and make it hastily, so that it does not cool, then spread upon the form that you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and place on top of the paper the eyes; and if the malady holds in .i. eye only, so must one operate in .i., and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in the broth of an egg; and let the head of the patient be in your hand and place your thumb showing on top of the medicine, and press .i. poc and a little more every time that the patient feels pain from the medicine, because it feels pain as much as fire. When you have done this long, so remove the medicine with your thumb. And when the burning sensation has passed, so lift the eye lid and look if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well. If not, so put back on more medicine upon the place where the medicine did not work, until your workings are equal, and your eyes set right; then put on moistened cotton in butter until the burning feeling is gone, after cure the place of the ointment which is called "dyafenis" and other, as long as it is sound.
And if it is necessary that you be careful in your work with great care so that it does not fall of the medicine to the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then resume the medicine on that spot which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not the right way be returned to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put their head on your healthy side; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or wobble their head; after put cotton moistened in the white of egg or in the juice of parsley on the eye; after warm the cautery which is like: and place it on the head as its shape of a goose feather, along with that which the cautery be; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, so also like a tent; but anyway, this which is shaped worths for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and remove the rot, and dry it; and if it is closed, so work it, and remove the contents from the bow; after put on the warm cautery form, and hold your hand on the cautery to the part of the white below the eye, that your hands do not make folly; and place the cautery in the grease of the eye, and the corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If those are not, begin the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and let it for 3 days; after put on cotton moistened in butter, and cure with the ointment drying until it is healed, and if 40 days pass that it is not healed, put on medicine sharp corrosive until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what it would come in its chapter.
And there is a way of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients said. Listen to fistula, and make it in its place; after put in the fissure 1 camomile subtle of this is the form: and they make to the quantity of 3 of plum; and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and do not move the patient at all, that the plums melted do not run to his eye; and it is necessary one put on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine of figs or in honey: the plum so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If this is not the case, then it is necessary to administer purulent matter to the wound, and bring the fistula back to the body of the wound according to what is proper in its own place.
Of incisions in lips Often happen incisions in lips that are called "hairs", and also in the lips of children.
When you cure these incisions of those that we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then use i. small surgical cautery according to this form:
And he puts it carefully into those hollows until it comes to the bottom; after, heal the place with cerote until it is healed.
Of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swelled and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit; therefore it is necessary that you have i. cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after you burn or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron glows at the bottom of it, and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after curing with what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that's good; and if this is not so, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in your chapter.
Of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the head of the patient in your hand; after heat the cautery whose form will come here afterwards in such a manner that you put a chain on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot gently, and hold as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after raise your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and keep it for an hour and remove forcefully.
And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupting dried.
of the pain of teeth
When pain of teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or moisture, and the treatments of medicine are not worth it, then there is need for cautery according to two manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of leek, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelope on the tip of a tent, and moisten it in heated butter, and put it on the aching tooth firmly and hold until it cools; and thus do often as many times as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see so moist wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one hot iron until the heat comes to the top of the tooth.
The cautery assembled fire is such that you take a iron or steel rod, and be so large that the heat does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, from which its shape will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed the same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then pull out the root; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated iron as is described below, which has two openings for the fumes to issue from one side of the cautery; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice if it is necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and place moist cotton in butter above the burn as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place of ointment and tents until it is healed.
When the moistures prevail on the channels of the pharynx, and also when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first emptied by solutive medicines; afterwards cauterize at the root of the throat, and be careful that you do not come near to the throat, and burn no more than a point from the heart. After that, make one other cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let it be the cautery which is called 'clavile' as we have described before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the  thrust When all and diseases of the body are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is ancient, if you make two cauteries on the shoulder in their veins; and one other cautery between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be called 'clavile' according to the form that is said before.
And if you see, make a cautery by pricking to the whole cautery that is called 'poins' because of its form is before in the disease of ears; and let the poins be up to XXX, or whichever it reaches. After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be at 3 days according to this form:
And for those are lighter cauteries, because you make them 3 in a row.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward sovieze the patient on his back and on his ribs; after lift the heart which is within by the two of your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then cauterize with the instrument which has .ij. ners as this is the form:
and cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib, and there would be the figure of the cautery together .iiij. cauteries; and for that is made cautery with the cautery which has .iij. ners, so that the figure of cauterization are sis cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
And sometimes is adjusted on this, that is, nerve for which there are eight cauteries.
After put on the cautery parsley crushed with a seal; after make rest the patient, and let not the members be moved for a long time until he is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the clavicle cautery or many cauteries in prickling. Because the joint is closed, and moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
of cautery of pleura
The ancient said that one must make to pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the greatest that you will be able to find, and be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; and moisten it in oil, and press it on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauteries a little descending in the part which is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining behind a little; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, and another on the stomach, and one between two shoulders, and two as two ribs below the cautery that is between two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
And the ancients said that no man use cautery of fire resembling one razor, and it is heated and put between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and jump outside the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you treat the disease of mice, according to what we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not improve, then there are three kinds of cautery that are all good.
Of these, one kind is that you make three or four cauteries, in length according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient lie on his back;
And another kind of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two ners, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the heart which is above the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation by which you raise the heart be according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After it sets the two nerves on fire as long as the skin is pierced on the other side, and then removes the cautery, and in this way there will be four. And if you see, cauterize with the whole cautery on three nerves. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worse than the other cures before said.
of dropsy
Cauteries are not useful for dropsy, except for the manner called "asclytes." When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one in the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the skin.
After leave the cautery uncovered to fight rot for a long time, and let not the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have before shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is put before.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in that one who is hydrophytic, and are full of water, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep within, thus shall be driven out the water, and be the cautery according to this form:
After make on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the cuttlefish; and be the cauteries long, one below the knee front and the other out, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries towards length without curing, that they are in his; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When solution of belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in stomach and in intestine is flebbed, and cannot be cured by ways of cures; and you see the patient well suffering and of strong virtue, then make .i. great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before about cautery of the stomach, at the cautery circulating; and .iiij. cauteries around the navel subtle to each .i. cautery clavicle subtle, and .ij. cauteries on the loins.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each buttock, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large, because the cure is profitable when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are either at the base or more numerous, and are old and are of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not help much, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below the almecate point and point in triangulating, and one cautery below the buttocks two inches.
And if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook well, and one sees the face swell up, then on the face make one large cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the mouse at all the cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the flesh that is called "thelul"
When you cut the "thelul," if you heat the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it on fire upon that "thelul" while cutting; and let it there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that the blood stops; do this one or two times, and if there is much flesh, cauterize each as we have said; after the cure of blemishes benefiting as long as they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the "alchatim," it will have more help.
of a poorly healed wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will recount in its place, then there comes such a malady that can only be healed by cautery.
When a fistula comes to any one, and it is filled with rottenness and moist corruption, then you must prove at once a fine tent, and guard that you know at once the tent how much it has of length. After, sharpen the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent there is entered, and re-begin the cautery as long as the body rotten and corrupted are burned, one time, or two, or three, according to the quantity of its need; and guard not to burn the nerve which are in there, and the great veins. If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestine, then guard those parts, and do not make these fires only in their fleshy part, and think that it is not pierced; after cure the place as long as it is healthy, and if the place is healed, and the matters are removed long time, then know that the place is completely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is foul, and corrupted the bones to the root; and thus like one of these which we will say in its place.
Of the illness of the kidneys When pain from cold comes to the kidneys, and of great windiness, and they take no sustenance from a woman, then it behooves you to make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the cautery clavile that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will make more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and let each cautery be as long as the finger; and make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be awl-shaped according to the form stated above.
of the groin When the groin is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends come late; and when they do come, great pain is felt: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the pudendum, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and let the cauteries be awl-shaped, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous humors descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and is found the place of the viscus department, so it befits you to cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip to i. cautery resembling a circle, and place it before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle; and if the cautery be such as that with which one has cauterized the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then make three cauteries of the olive large, and let the cautery be as well-formed as all the others; and cure it until it is healed.
of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in the division, and the cure is not good, and the illness is old: then it becomes necessary that you purge the patient of gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
After this you do the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: that is to say, together with ardent medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, of which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them of good depth and size, and have between each cautery a space the width of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
And if you wish, you cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have previously mentioned in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the marrow are burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica when the pain holds in the hip and does not reach to the thigh nor to the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes two cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers, on the left side a finger; and be the cauteries curette-shaped or be the heat of the heart burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to four fingers of the foot or near it, then he cauterizes where he feels the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
And this craft is if he makes more; and if it be known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, then one makes cautery with the curette or circular cautery, and well guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery as to burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not make more nuisance and contraction for the patient.
And I myself have seen many who made cautery above the ankle of the foot, and left it so much that the leg was all swollen, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted throughout the foot. After a solution of the belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the sage said in the cautery of the hip, from which this is the manner, make one such iron and let it be at the head as big as a thimble of a finger, or a little less, and let it be between bars and let it be from one bar to the other with a space the quantity of a knuckle; and let the bars be turned towards two parts, and let them also be like nuts, and let there be one iron handle well made; and this is the form:
And let it be heated until it is all red and give it feeling, and then put it on the bone of the hip of the diseased, and let it be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery reont and let it leave for three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and let the wound stay covered long time; after the cure of oiling until it is healed.
Albucasim said that we should use little of this cautery because of the fear of its effect, and few who use it are seen; and nonetheless, these are good cauteries, which can endure it, and where it is applied.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from too much bloodletting, or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these appearances is good for cautery except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with a punch, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cautery be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make .iij. or .iiij. cauteries at the middle clavicle cautery according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to little children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
When you see them and you view him cure, then cauterize him with this cautery according to this form.
So that the cautery pricks each part of the spine equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with the stinging cautery 2 lines or 3, and let the points be near one another. After curing the place until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not bring the cautery into a glibosité which is in the spawn of nerve.
of the pain of the joints
When pain of the joints are from moisture that is spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the wise call “podagra” properly, and when it is of cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive according to this form:
And if it is needed that you prick on the face of the foot, if they cauterize all the cautery one claims "point". And if the pains come up to knee and to other joints, and this happens many times, if they cauterize on each knee three or four cauteries of each part, at all the olive cautery; and if you have need of more, if you make more, but do not hold your hand hard except as long as the thickness of the heart is burned.
And if the pains descend to knee and back, then administer the cautery that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the bone two lines; and if there remains no pain in the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the armpits or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance for the patient and pure medicines. For if you make good governance for him and you purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the sciatic nerve
When rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs and it is new, so when you see it cured, that he does not move that day; and that he use things which bind his belly, so that the cord descends from his belly; after the do make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the testicles are repaired, and place them in your palms, and sign with a little below the rupture on the bone of the thigh, and a whole sign that is like half of a circle above the body; then cauterize with this which is the form:
until it is white and that he feels them. Then place the testicles in their place; and the assistants hold his hand so that they do not return backwards; and well bind the thighs of the patient, and put below him .i. cushion and .i. bandage on the thighs, and .i. other on the leg which holds his hands; then place the cautery on the sign with all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, so start again another until you come to the bone; and be careful that the testicle does not fall out when you are doing the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or other evils.
And know that when you do not come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of them, and of large people also large according to their measure; after .iij. days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; after cure other ointments as long as he is healed, and let the patient lie .xl. days on his back until the wound is well united; and it is necessary that his dressings be loosened for a long time, so that the testicles do not fall out when he wants to go into chambers.
And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, administer to him a good splint, and wear it for another 40 days; and have good rest, that he does not work much and beware of too much eating and drinking, and too much shouting; and if he does this teaching, he is completely healed. And I will say afterwards the cure of the tail in his chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make 1 cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and be at 1/3 of the heart; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize with the cautery at 3 angles according to this form:
but the first sign is the place of the break and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand at all the cautery clavicle. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
of old pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or a blow, and this pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine is no use, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that is well; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, for such custom is that it must be applied to the member that is nearest, therefore you must make the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
of mixture
The mixtures are aided sometimes by cautery with great help, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see them cauterized, take heed if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not desist nor linger, and if you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the patient, then make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. above the head towards nine, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the back of the neck; and let your hand remain so that the cauteries come close to the bone, and until the blisters issue forth so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mice according to what it is before.
And if the mixture is spread everywhere; and it manifests itself clearly, then it is necessary that you cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in the middle of the neck, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. large one on the knee and .i. other below it, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the ribs, and .ij. on the tendons of the hip, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the lower heel bone so that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done to make a cautery on the bone of the arm, and .i. other on the bone of the stomach, and .i. other on the liver.
And know that when more cautery is made, the more it does help, and it benefits him; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as much as healthy people feel it, because the body is already wholly corrupted. And it behooves the cautery to be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron. After cure, apply the place with flour of beans with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any limb and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a point entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery in the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nonetheless no one should intervene unless he knows the members and the exits of the nerves moving the body.
of splints
When the ailment called "albaras" is advanced, and medicines are of no avail, then cauterize it with a cautery a small puncture, according to the quantity of the heart's essence, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then cure it with flour of chickpeas and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and colon blood and alondine blood, of each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and expose it to the place until it is healed.
The cure of a chancre by cauterization
When a chancre appears at the beginning, and you see it arrested, then cauterize it with a cautery which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.  And nonetheless, wise men say that one should make cauterization also in the middle of the chancre; and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen any time; and a more proper thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said in much of cauteries.
of the swelling which cannot move
When some one has a malady which is called «adubelati», and it delays to heal or for the superfluity that it makes or for the blood of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or for the cold; and you see it hasten to heal: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards let him remain thus. For it will hasten to heal.
And if you see it grow worse with the entire cauterization, then heat the cautery with this form:
And put your hand in the middle of this malady which is called «adubelati» until the cautery pierces the core, and be such that the patient feels it burning outwards in such a manner that the course of the rot is lessened. Afterwards cure it until it is perfectly healed.
The cure of fire by iron
There is another way of disease that is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corruption of the limb, because it eats away at the limbs as if the lines were dry. If you see this sickness in someone who can suffer cautery along with fire, then sear the caulters small and large, according to what is right for the place where the sickness is; after that, cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that everything that is corrupt is removed. And then leave it .iij. days, and put on the cauterized places broiet with oil as long as the scabs from the fire are gone, and all the corruption. After the cure of the softening that generates flesh. And if you see after .iij. days that healthy flesh is not born, that is good; and if it is not so, then begin the cautery again on what remains corrupt.  And this corruption has sometimes been cured with medicine ague in place of fire cautery; but all the same, fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of medicine ague in the division: take it when you need it.
from the roots that come to the feet
Many times it happens that the feet by fire are born a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and is a large thing hurt which bleaches the foot. And the cautery of this disease so is according to .ij. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. Cautery of fire so is that you heat .i. cauter cheveit as it is a feather of vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate the nail from all parts, and that it has subtle edges; after it puts all hot on the nail, and turns your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it so .iij. days until it begins to get rottenness; then you make a poultice of wild mallows ground with silk, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nails will fall and be uprooted from their roots. Then cure the place with ointment applying fat until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen in hands and feet, so it behooves that you bring them cautery of hot water; and is in this manner: take a chain of iron or iron, or a feather of vulture, and put on the nail and the althelul, that is to say porrelz warts; and put the chain on so that it penetrates all around, then put a drop of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the edge of the chain comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep to the root; and suffer the patient a little the burning of the hot water an hour; then let it be, and it will uprooted all at its roots. Thus do one after another, as long as you eradicate all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that generate flesh.
The cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold, or from quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make 4 cauteries or 4 on the spine of the back, 1 cautery between each spine; and 1 cautery or weight, and 1 on the stomach at the olive cautery; so he will cease to tremble, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
of pus-filled pustules
Sometimes appear by fire on the bathed body, or pus-filled pustules, that come from large corrupted matters.  It is necessary at first when they appear that one make cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle stick, so that its point be seized in the fire, or of long aristeloque root, or at the lenticular cautery. And sometimes cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow from then onward, but are broken up the superfluities from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great spurts of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the member, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to bleed.
And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, hasten to put your finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it very much until the bleeding is calmed under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put on fire the olive cauteries smaller and larger as many as they are red; then take one, or a large or small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
And if it leaps outwards when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to make these one after the other until the wound is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the vein shortens from the artery, it cannot be well stretched even when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon which have power to stretch blood; and be bound and strained adequately.
Who will bring tightening of the strap or tightly bandage with cloth or set things burning upon it, or similar things, if it does not profit so much.
And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he must put his thumb on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly bind it until it is stretched over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the thumb, but often moisten with cold water that be very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make those in front who has need for cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicines, and their applications and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will go in this chapter by the same way for those who find it easier, for what they want.
And therefore as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary to exercise greater caution.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. And of these there are those who give you their senses and say: “Wait, I am healed”; and the illness is deceitful.
Most dear son,
Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, that I have devised you from the head to foot, for those that you find more easily those which you will need.
the head full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children after birth, and when the midwife strains too hard the child's head; and sometimes it comes from a cause unknown.
And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all those that I have seen it hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to leave the treatment in such cases.
And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and believed so much the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is such if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you cut in the middle of the head a wide fissure; and as long as two fingers, as long as the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more deep, and the abscess is larger, you make two fissures in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head open on each side, and the water leaps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you; then it is necessary that you cut in the middle of the head three fissures according to this manner:
And after the incision extract the moisture all out. After extract the fissures of drapes and powders, and put in wine and oil, and let so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound by tents and by ointments, and let restrain the chief ligament, and then feed the patient dry meat from a little moisture until the limb be fortified and healed.
And another way of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and the assembly of the water; for sometimes it is before; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and the fullness of the water, and open it according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein flow blood, so that the patient dies from the decrease of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
Of rheumatism
When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the breast, and the illness is ancient, and the cure of medicine does not help, then the last cure is cautery with this one by which they cover the two arteries.
It is therefore necessary, when you see them to cover, that the patient bends their head back; after which rub the place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then restrain the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein lies, and its points after the ears, and there are placed; then sign the points of it, then cut both with a sharp spatula of two parts. Until the depth reaches to the bone, and this be by the wide part of the head.
And if you see, thrust the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting also as two fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, the blood jumps out continuously upwards.
And if the artery does not open at the touch, you must measure the quantity of space of .iij. fingers' lengths, then sign and cut until the bone; and that which it is necessary for blood to be put out is .vj. c., and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone without any thickening, then you cut it so that no abscess comes, then restrain the wound and bind it, and care for it with ointment until it is healed.
of migraine
When a longstanding migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the humors of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by means of cures of medicine and all that does not benefit them, then we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is poco returned outward than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it straitens the neck of the patient with some drapes, then rubs the place with any rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula for which this is the form:
then scrape the leather lightly until you come to the artery, then drive it upwards with pincers, and depart well from the webs that are under each side; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the uncin, then cut off that part according to the quantity of .ij. chies. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out all the blood at all.
And drive out the blood from .vj. c/, up to .iij.; and if the artery is large, it behooves you to tie it in .ij. leus with a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not come before the welding of the wound, and comes bleeding; then cut off the superfluity which is between the .ij. liens in the same hour, and then, if you will, cauterize it with the cutellaire cautery up to the bone until the chies are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of warm complexion.
For the cautery is aid to finish the moisture: for this it is of greater aid against moisture. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put on them tents well made; and when one unties them, be cured with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until they are healed; and if without a short of the artery as much as you work it, then haste to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the blood be stopped; and if you do not have these present, then put on the place your loincloth as long as the blood is frozen, and raise the place with cold water until the blood ceases, and be strained as it is necessary; and that which is milder and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant of .ij. parts, but the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat. For when the instruments is too thick, it holds less its heat. And must have between the two knives one should be of wide space, and then when you have signed on each of the two sides, and you put hot iron above until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two lengths; and let them be separated between the two shoulders because it is not soldered by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes flow down the veins that are on the forehead of the head of force, and it does not benefit medicine treatment at all when it is done, and you see the face of the patient wrap around, and feels the forehead with trembling as if from fright; and where oil is present and moist so that the hair of the eyebrows falls out, and the eyebrows are scorched, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is a need for this cure.
And they call it 'contused cure' in old times, and you do behind the patient who has this ailment the hairs that he have or front, then he make 3 incisions on the front evenly according to the length of the front; and one of the incisions as 2 should all remove the front going down until the nose, and the other 2 as 2 ribs above the cheekbones, and keep yourself from the incision of the arteries that are the 2 ribs above the cheekbones; and move your hand from the continuation of the 2 mandibles, and let each wound be the quantity of 3 fingers across.
from the incision that is below the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the 2 incisions to all the scalp that is above the bone, then make another part from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract further this spatula.
If you put in the first split the instrument that is called "cultellar," and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form: And put the sharp side toward the flesh towards the heart, and the blunt side towards the bone, and the point as far as it comes to the middle split. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it reaches that which opens from the heart, and then on the other side make in the middle split until the other end; and then withdraw the blood evenly, and express the place for the blood taken; then put in each split a tent of old cotton, and put above cloths moistened in wine and oil and arsenic, and keep that abscesses do not come; and on the third day untie the bandage, and then administer great quantities of warm water, then the cure of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures with which one cures wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When a certain catarrh comes acutely and you see the eyes watery and small, and the vision weakened, and the papers burned; and the hairs fall out, and where the chief is it causes sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that these matters and this catarrh come only from many veins, and the cure that there is, it is this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise their forehead, then make a large cut between the brow, and another wide one.  i. poc. And begin from the left temple incision to the right temple, and let the incision be up to the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that are moved by the head; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then sew between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton, and linen bandages; then bandage above with cloths moistened in wine and oil, and keep it warm from abscesses; when it is removed, it is necessary that you rub the bone as long as pus begins to come out, then cure it with drying things, that make pus dry.
In this manner: take two parts of flower of wheat and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with it; and administer it to these wounds in order to stop the pus from spreading everywhere.
Of the stopping of the ears
All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, such as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing such as water and oil and similar things.
When something falls into the ear, a stone or another kind of thing that does not join to the ear nor grows in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze with condiments, and plug his nostrils when he sneezes comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with fine pincers, for this is the form:
If it jumps out with the pincers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine incision of small doubleure; and if it does not jump out by this, make a snake of lead and thrust the head of the snake or passage into the ear very hard, and plug what is around the snake with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the snake; then pull it out forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a gut of what those who catch birds use, and put it into some instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a dab of cotton around it; then press the gut on the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out. And if it does not go away from all these things that we have said, then you hurry to split the ear thus that an abscess comes out and spasms; and the manner of splitting is that you first make the patient bleed from the head, and extract the blood according to the measure of his strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fat or where it depends; and let the split be as a crescent moon, until you come to the bone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it diligently with your mouth; and the cure until it is healed. And if it is grains that are in it and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue forth, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
and administer an incision to that grain. But do not make this when you think that the grain is moist for the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract with fine pincers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be aligned.
In the ear when water falls, it is good that the patient use a first condiment externally, and open the ear with old cotton. And be lying on that same ear where the water is. If it goes out for this, it is good. If it does not go out, take many pebbles according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and heat them a little in fire; and put them in the patient’s ear, one after the other, and push them up from their feet on the other side, and lay a stone on top of the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease to do this of stones until the water goes out all, and so it will go out all. And if you see, take one reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end catch fire until the hottest part of the reed is burned; then make another piece of reeds as long as the water exits, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, like a flea and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large body that one can feel it, administer extraction with tweezers; and it is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear in the sun: if you see any worms, then you treat them with subtle tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the cannula of which this is the form:
And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed in forming all the chain; do this so often that all the worms come out.  And if they do not obey to come out, then stuff around the chain with cotton as I have said about the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and your medicines into the ear to all this instrument, for this is the form as you see:
And be of silver or brass narrow below at i. small openings, and above open for distilling; and for pressing inside the distillation i. instrument of brass well made for this, and if you see take i. razor and wrap around the point evenly cotton; then put your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the chain, and the chain be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be i. pock heated over a fire then one distils it into the ear; and keep that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be so good.
Of the stopping of ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through the closing of a wound, or of flesh born inside the ear, and these closures come at times from within the ear, if one cannot see them; and at times it comes .i. pock of pus, and one sees well.
That one which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of great healing in more dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent opening, then the work has all these spatulation, as to what this one is formed.
And be it sharp and trenches in front and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh born or core of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is entirely removed.
And if the impaction is in the ear, take one razor fine and light, and heat it a little in the fire, then put it in the body of the ear. If you feel the impaction which the patient feels greatly in the ear, pierce gently, and guard that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Do this for no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you withdraw the tent and move another tent moistened in cerate which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, dip a sponge and drape it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the bleeding which are or treated by distillations.
of the paper of the sheets
This healing that comes on paper of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, so you should extend them with tweezers and pliers, and cut from a spatula at their roots; then put over it powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorticate, so you cauterize with the subtle lentil cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is worth moving; and many times repair, since nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, so are those roots burned and do not return.
of the gristle
Many times in papers come to the eyes things that seem like gravel in its shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hailstorm," and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take care if the hailstorm moves from one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the large opening, then the skin of each part lightly, then take pliers, and cut. If you cannot cut without perceiving a hole in the paper, then it does not harm the patient; and if the fissure is great, so assemble it with a suture, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, because the eye returns it quickly and forms flesh.
And if the hailstorm is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and being the hailstorm with pliers, and cut it and press on one side and the other; and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not harm; and when the hailstorm is cut, let the eye water with salt water, and cure the place of that which forms flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the eyes
This is an eye grease that is made in the webs of papers above, and this happens more to children than to others, and grieves much their eyes, and they come to them the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun for that the tears hasten to their eyes; and for that they lie down they on their faces aside, and sleep upon it, and are their papers below their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and the appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press its place with your fingers and feel the exirnach between.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head in your bosom; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinach of each part, then put it on top of it; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture on the spatumile a notch of a width, and not be more than large as the wound that you make to the vein; and make the skin in part until you come to the exinach; and in more arrangements comes exinach from the opening, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Extract therefore a whole piece of cloth charpit between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread; and guard that you do not add in the opening, that you do not come to all the spatumile up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
And if the exit does not open at the beginning of the crack, then slightly enlarge the crack until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in wine and water, and put them on the spot, and bind with bandages.
And if to such men who grind flaxseed and put it on in order to corrupt the moisture which has stagnated. Then cure it until it is healed. And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then cure it with ointments soothing until it is healed.
of hairs of paper
When on paper the hairs grow adjusted other than nature's, and are old, they harm the eyes, and bring manner of maladies like tears accustomed, and softenings of the papers and albugine, as much as it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and is the cure according to .iiij. manners: or by cautery altogether fire, or by medicine ague according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitch or by canes, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the chief of the patient on your healthy, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if that no, there puts an needle to all .i. thread above; and be that below the margin of the paper or the hair grows beside those hairs, and draws .i. thread to the above to all the paper, and turns it to the razor; then does in the part below the paper, below the hairs adjusted, to all the spatula cutting, from the great tear to the small; then extracts .i. thread, and puts below the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then seizes on the paper a figure of ench, like the leaf of myrtle, and altogether it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if there is who has need that one copes a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then does on all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have signed, and commences from the lou grant tear to the small; and be it one of the clefts near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then puts the oncine in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then scrapes it all; then assembles the .ij. lips to a stitch of an needle to all .i. thread of fine wool, and wipes the blood, and does make aird the superfluity of the threads above the .ij. eyebrows to any sticky things, if you see to do this; and if not, then has no care, then leaves the stitch and the threads up to .iij. days or .iiij.; then cures the wound without stitch of drying and constricting things, because the paper revives at the joining of the wound and the assembling of it, but the stitch is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and it is that you trace the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have counted, at three ounces severed according to the form which is here:
then cut what is above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has one thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread beside the big tear, and the second thread beside the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand equally, and raise all the skin over what you have signed, as we have counted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hair of the paper is converted: so it behooves you to use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
The cure of the wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the fold inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij. canes by art, and .ij. subtle liens as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut off the .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above what surmounts the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. canes of the .ij. parts form; and let it stay thus for some days, and the skin which is strained will die and shrink and rise, until it heals by itself.
If it delays, then cut it with more force, and then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is soldered, and if it has been lifted the paper, and they will no longer prick the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
The works are such that you prick an agile needle, and it puts .i. thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the shoulders and tie one and the other subtly, and be the length of the threads a palm long; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and tie the chief of the thread; then put the patient's head on your healthy; and be below the sun so that the works are declared, because it is one work subtle and small, then put the needle to all the chase in the root of the hair adjusted, and make it pierce in the paper carefully until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair, if there is .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come out all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, so you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes out of the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for .ij. days or .iij., until the hair hardens in its place and grows the flesh above; and if the hairs are small, so accompany one long hair from the natural hooves, and be raised with that one or you leave it, until it is lengthened and then lift it.
of the rot of the eye
When this sickness which is called "aleacrati" or the rot comes to the eye, it comes in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens through sudden wound, or incision or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of operation on it is that you cut open that suture and separate its lips, and put inside a tent of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it does not behoove you to use in the cure of it things that dry and restrain. Because if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or aloe and linseed seeds are cooked, and diaquilon ointment melted in any of the oils, and a tent is wrapped around it, and it cures with this.
And the treasure of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form it was before; and these operations that we have said are nothing but addresses for this illness, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
of the char which comes in the eye
This sickness that is desoz which truly is called «axacrati», and is natural and accidental. The accidents come from wound and fissure and cautery and similar things; and the way of the work in it is that you prick an needle, in which it has .i. double thread, and put it into the char, and make it pierce from the left tear to the right, so that the threads comes into .ij. chiefs of the char; then is the char above all the needle, and the cut is at .i. spatumile wide.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it ought, it is good; if not, then take .i. razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make .ij. fissures or cuts inside the paper; and let the chiefs of the .ij. fissures be at the .ij. angles of the incision that you have cut, and make angles so that when they are assembled, that the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no «.j. griesche»; then remove that char, according to the quantity that its edges are gone under, from those that follow the paper, then join the .ij. parts together, and stitch them with a thread of linen; then cure it with what we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the ailment comes from a split or seam or cautery, then it is necessary that you make a plain split under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the ailment, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters equip anything of all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what it is necessary of work and instruments in more dispositions.
of the paper's  humidity
When this soldering occurs to the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is soldered with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural work, then it is necessary that you put the tip of a razor under the paper, and raise it up; and the extent as pinches, as long as you cut what is hard to the spatula subtly, which is not too thick nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer that the spatula is too thick or bleaches the eye; and let your incision, with which you scrape that assembly, be slightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and it is healed all that assembly, and make no times in the salt water of the eye, and the sweet water lift, and coliere; then put between the paper and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened in an abundance of egg; and after the third day use the coliere and the things sudans as long as it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in two ways: it is fleshy and seeming to one hard skin, and another which is not fleshy, but seems like white frozen moisture, that when one touches it with iron and one cures it by pincers, one cannot; and the one and the other semblance begins towards the great tear, and crosses point by point until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then he opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coils the angle with small pliers, and the one above; then take a needle, and put it one hair of horse, or deer, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a point and stick it in the angle, and pierce it to the whole needle, and tie the angle with a thread and the one above, and scrape to all the hair the side of the angle which follows the eyebrow and the silk to the hair up to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear to the whole spatula subtly and with small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear, so that by incision does not come the body of tears accustomed; and at no time is the angle placed only once, and to the thread, as we have said; then scrape it all over the spatula from this is the form:
And keep that the spatula does not touch the fleshy veil and break it, and that the prickle is not pierced; and after the incision throw into the eye a little bit of silk ground up, and from the collar made of litharge, and let it remain until the next day; then cure it as it requires until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot push the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, so work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lighter point according to this form:
And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it diminishes not and the reason is hastened, then distill from your mouth into the eye collar made of litharge and red collar and silk ground up, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same operation, as long as it is all removed.
If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, such as a boil, then cauterize, and cure the boil first until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear harms the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it with a bandage, and cut a part and not half, that body of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of lead white.
of the flesh which is born on the iris
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the iris and restrains upon the eyelids, and turns them outward, and it seems like a rose of bolster; and the work is that the patient puts his head into your healthy one, then operates the eyes, and coils all that flesh with bandages suitable to this, and supports it with force; then cut the first flesh, and go cutting all the way down to the end, and be careful that you do not blind the eye during the operation; and let the incision of the spathule be as we have said in the incision of the angle and with little forces from which one removes the sebacle, as how it is formed after this chapter he demonstrates.
And when the incision is complete and all the flesh has been removed, then apply the oil of silphium or you distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the eye cotton with egg white, so that it may be assured of a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the pus does not rise to the surface, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as long as flesh is adjusted in the eye by this manner.
But nonetheless it is necessary that you align the cure of each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in surgery of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from the work.
of the veins of the eyes
Veins are red and covered over the eye, and they take away from sight their work and weaken the eye all days. It is necessary therefore that first you look at the eye, in what way it is, if it is before, and there is no other disease except for the vein; therefore the coil in this manner: instruct the patient to put his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins at all the circumference according to his wisdom, and let the circumference be subtle double according to this form:
And let two circumferences be by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then this coil as forces those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut further than those veins; and when you will have done this, then distill into the eye  green and red colic for to corrupt what is remaining of the vein.
And if you do not have the power to gather all these in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things that appease the pain of the eyes, and let it rest for several days until the pain is appeased and the abscess is assured hot, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The fistula is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and blackness, then the king has all the instruments of what here are the form; and it is called “sharp chief,” and is made of fire iron to one chief point, and is pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put it upon the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little as long as you know that this corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
If the parts are joined, and flesh grows, and the body of the bow is joined, and remains so for forty days, and it does not renew or become inflamed, and no bad accident comes to it, know that it is cured; if this is not the case, then there is no other way but to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and that you uncover the bone a second time by iron, and by sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one piece according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the shaft be thinned until the end as you see here:
Then place it on the bone next to the lacrimal, and move your hand from the eye i.e. 1 finger's width, then turn all of the forest until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through what comes in this if he holds his hand on his cheek; and then return the place of dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the ligaments, then it goes to the cheek; thus it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the issue of the eye
When the eyes are fully open and there is no disturbance to the cheek or decrease, it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal, then place suction cups or a haterel without injuring to suck, then put on the eye i.i. linen made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla, and then strain the eye, and place it over bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each in .iiij., and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need; then strain by means of a firm bandage above, and recommence the suction cups to suck without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, it is necessary that you strain it tightly; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good; if not; then recommence the application and cloths and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
of the displacement of woven cloth
When a disruption comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and there comes forth some papers as .i. grains of resins, and it is esperantauble to see; therefore if you saw it covered, the work is such that you put an awl in the root of the lower part until that of above, then put another awl where there is .i. double thread of the edge of the lamier; and let it pierce, and leave the first awl according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then extract the awl and put on the oiled linen half in a basin of egg; and leave it until the threads fall with the grape, then cure the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and at times the wound is restrained by the grape each side of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the eyes show a great appearance, then pierce them with a subtle spatula which comes from the oil, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter in this way; then extract it until it is healed.
of the eye's cavity
This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the cavity of the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit upon one seat properly arranged and straight, then take the head between your hands on two parts, and move it until you see the cavity coming upwards to your eyes; then be so as to fix it, and do not descend and be disordered the light, and let the patient see things as he used to; and if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water, and if the descent of the cavity is not properly arranged as we have said. So make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make upon the cornea one point by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the cavity issues; and when it is issued, so distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fennel is boiled and honey, then be cured of another cure until it is healed.
of the eyes' waters
We have seen the appearances of the eyes in division, and what is needed to examine them; so in work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and tie their healthy eye and hold it very tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if their eyes are left, or in your right hand if their eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if their eyes are left, the instrument that is called "almagda," or in your left hand, if their eyes are right; then put the point of the instrument next to the cornea through the width of a rat's tail in the white part of the eye to the part closest to the tear duct, then push the instrument that is called "almagda" skillfully, and turn your hand until it pierces the white part of the eye, and feel that the almagda comes to the hollow place; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the end of the measure of the space which is from the iris to the end of the black pupil; and this is the cornea of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then put the instrument up to where the liquid is, then squeeze it out one vein after another. If the liquid is now coming out, then the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
After rest i.e., a little, and if the eye goes up the second vein, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ensconced and it does not go up, gently withdraw almagda by rotating your hand a little; and then put back into the eye a drop of gold-colored oil, and leave that in the eye. Then put outside the eye a stopper or a piece of linen moistened in rose oil and in yolk of egg, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on top as a compress with yolk of egg.
And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have very hard eyes, then it is necessary that you prick the instrument that is called "alberit," from which this is the form:
And therefore pierce only the conjunctiva and do not go too deep, but make .i. it subtle, then put in the almond as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with .i. ointment beforehand, in which he sleeps on his back in .i. dark place; and be devoid of all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put the bandage back on until the seventh day; and it is not proper that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bind this, because the water ascends hastily.
And when the abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the address of this who soothes abscesses; and when it is calmed, then untie the sight and put on his face .i. orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house. And then goes out of the house little by little, and converts itself into its cases; and know that none of disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almond piercing, so that one sucks the water, but nonetheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the likenesses of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them they see; and be of grain properly.
And let the head of these be of the same subtlety, and the last in three angles sharp.
from the flesh on the knee
Sometimes knees are born with various  joined cartilages, because of which some seem like scorpions with many parts. And if there is such a one and it has cartilage  encrusted in a dark color, and if it has cartilage soft in good color. In that one, therefore, of those cartilages which is soft, and not encrusted, you must make the patient sit between your hands opposite the sun; and open his nostrils, and cast the oncine to those cartilages, and draw them out; then cut what you can sustain with the sharp subtle spatula from one part, as long as you know that the cartilage is entirely removed.
And if anything remains which one cannot cover, it opens everything, i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if without a tear or abscess is sewn, or the secort as it is necessary; and if it are malignant abscesses, then haste and cauterize them until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then put on a clean cloth and water or wine.
If the nose works and moisture comes until the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so that instruments cannot come to cut; therefore it is necessary that you put .i. a thread of linen about a finger thick, and be knotted by the hands our, and have between each knot an inch or less; and place the patient's shoulder on the thread in its nostril at its power, and pull out smelling until it comes out through the nostril inside the mouth; and many times do children so in school, and it is a light thing to him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and feel them one after the other so that they are as ours which are or thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the threads, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this .iij. days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nostril a patch of felt for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose:
And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a candlestick, and conduct it thus; and if you see fit, make a closed candlestick, and let the instruments be full to cleanse the head; and have .i. handle at the top for holding when one heats the oil or any liquor.
of the bone onto the hip
Many times a sickness called "telul" is born at the joint of the hip, and it grows and becomes very large until it is a visible thing to look at; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, and all bone must be removed, then put on its place the cautery or burning medicine; and if one delays in cutting it until it is large, he takes warning if it is hard, of dull color, of poor feeling: do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it any time, it brings great evil to the sick person; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of dull color, and you see that one can cut it all, then empty the sick person and cut it without fear, and cure the place with things drying and restraining.
when the hip is cut and sewed
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these working cartilages, it does little good, because in some men. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to one stitch, then cure it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must scrape all parts of their core until they heal, then assemble the two lips to one stitch, and restrain them, and powder on powder of dragon's blood, and incense ground; and put on top of the powders a piece of plaster of strong or other plasters that bind, and let it stay until it dries by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of the stitch is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
of abscesses of the lips
In men's mouths often happen within the lips abscesses hard, seeming like grains of mustard, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut above each pustule, and take with tweezers and chop in each part; then apply to the place after incision of powdered vitriol, until the blood be stanched; and then the ointment of honey, and cure the place with dry things until it be healed.
of the flesh of the gums
Many times flesh grows on the gums, that the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut it at its root, and leave to clot the wound or blood; then put on the place powdered vitriol, or other powders astringent and drying; and if that flesh returns after the incision, which happens often, so cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are smelly; so it is necessary for you to make the patient sit between your hands, and his chin be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until there remains nothing; and thus do of the blackness and the greening, and the jaundice and other spots, until they are cleansed; and if one removes those that are at the first reason, it is good; if those no, so it starts again to re-remove the second day and the third, until you have all removed; and know that the teeth need different forms of instruments for removal, according to what the work shows them, because the scraper used to remove outside teeth have other forms than those used between teeth; and these forms and others be with you prepared.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you wait for the drawing as much as you can, because one must not do it badly; because it is a substance very high until then one has no excuse to remove. Therefore when the patient is constrained to endure the ordeal, it behooves you to be certain of the tooth aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and he thinks that it is the good tooth, and pulls out the healthy tooth; and all the while does not depart the pain because of this, as long as the evil remains, for we have already seen this happen to these sinners; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it behooves you to scrape around the tooth on all sides with a spatula sharp and strong to ward off the gum from all sides; then move it with your two hands or pliers subtle at the first point and point, as long as it is well loosened, then firmly affirm the pliers; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After the tooth is pulled straight without breaking it, and if it does not come out freely, then take one of these instruments and push it gently into each side, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, then it behooves you to fill it with wool, where the holes are; and if you strain it subtly with pliers so that it does not break when extracting it; and it behooves you wisely to work around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And therefore well guard yourself that you do not break it, and remain a part, and return to the patient through the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And guard yourself that you do not act like ignorant healers, who by their haste and by their boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and bring not about what we have recounted; but they bring about sometimes through this great illness for the roots that remain there, or for the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or water and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply vitriol powder to the spot; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, to which one must use teeth first, be at long points and thick handles, that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be of thick members so that they do not bend when pulling, and be of well-made iron, and be toothed for gripping firmly.
from the root of the teeth When the root remains in the pulling, then it is necessary that you put on top of it a cotton ball moistened in butter, for one or two days, until the place becomes soft, then insert tongs which are called "algefri", so that the head seems like a beak of a bird; and be inside made also as a file, and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and put in the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a spatula, because of this is its shape:
And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out with this, it is good; if it does not, help yourself with all the instruments, of which the forms come after.
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two teeth, of which is its shape:
and other iron instruments that are in front in the direction of the teeth, and this instrument which seems like a large pair of pliers, whose shape is here:
And let this instrument be so that it cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not mentioned; and the wise masters subtle find for themselves their instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others and if one does not break the bone or other bones, or it can, then search for the instruments that are needed, that I have told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the form: And let them be thick and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but it can hold and remove; and then restore its place with medicines suitable to this, and if there is in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the shape is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it behooves you to know if the tooth is born after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file it or file it; therefore the rake; and if it is attached with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to .i. small beak, and let it be of sharp iron at its tip:
And the coping bit by bit in hands for a few days because of the hardness of the tooth, and for those you do not move others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then the file of a piece like this is the form:
And it is also like the file used to make needles; and in filing the tooth bit by bit over a few days gently, so that it does not move until it falls; then the plane at the end without any ridge, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then it is necessary to file the roughness until it is equal, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front moves or by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it so that it will move, but that it will not fall out, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, and this does not work; then it is necessary to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver thread becomes green and rotted, but gold never changes; and be the thread neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth are being pushed together, then take the thread and put it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the chips between the bad teeth, if there is one or more, until you come cleverly to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the place where you began, and strain your hand subtly and wisely, so that it does not move at all; and be your ligature at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut off the threads of the thread with pliers, and assemble them, and put them back between the healthy teeth, and put it in such a way that it will not touch the tongue; and then leave it as tight as possible, and if it comes undone, or the thread breaks, then restrain it with another thread; and so remain and serve thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see.
And when the tooth falls out, then one puts it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and let no one interfere who is not wise and suffering, and at any time one makes the shape of a tooth from the bone of a calf, and one puts it in the place where the lack is, and one restrains it as we have said, and it remains and serves thus for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
At no time is this bond which comes from under the tongue or nature that one is born thus; or by accident of a wound sutured; and the works are such that you work the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your healthy hand, and raise the tongue; then cut the nervous bond of the large, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from the suture of a wound, then put the probe and cut the bond of the large one; and guard that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is below; and when you have done, raise the level with rose water and assil, or cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen; and apply it to the sick person each night, so that the bond cannot become sutured. And if bleeding occurs, put on top vitriol ground; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
And if you see it of fiery color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, then place the probe, and make it with a subtle spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the blood does not stop at your work, put on top vitriol ground until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw everything out; then raise the level of assil and seil, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
Sometimes comes from inside the throat bulges which are called «godath», and they call them properly the .ij. almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is a hard abscess of small sense and of fusse color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the decorrement of blood; but let it until it is dead, and then you will part it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of blainche color reont, and the root is subtle, have appeared the instrument to cover, but first look if the abscess chalz rests and is appeased. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his hips be in your health, and work the mouth and the preigne the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue below all the instrument, from this is the form; and be of silver or of arain subtle as well as a knife:
And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the oncine and stick it in the almond, and drive it upward more than you can; and do nothing of the cloths with, then cut with the instrument, from this is the form, that seems a forces; and anyway the chief are curved, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron inde or d’andainne:
And if you do not have this instrument present, cut it with pliers, from this is the form:
And be trenching on one side, and on the other part name; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and ease, and if there is a discharge of blood, gargle the patient with water, or grated pomegranate peels, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then treat it until it is healed; and at no time when other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them like the two almonds always.
And I medicated a woman of an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of small size; and I had well closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not expire through the passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained so one or two days. And the abscess was to me so mounted that it had been placed two fingers by the two openings of birth. I therefore, at once, and put in one a needle, then the thread pulled out, and in the pulled out a great portion of pus; then I refixed another part in the other opening of birth, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after I put the needle into these abscesses, and cut a part, and there came out only a little bit of blood; and thus was unblocked the passage of the throat of the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I engaged it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus remained without growing; and I left these parts, and know only that God did with her after me.
of the grape
When the grapes are ripe and long, they are called "perpendicular"; and if they are soft and round, they are called "grapes." When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pustule of the abscess has subsided, and it is subtle, then it is necessary that you cut it; and the one that is rounded assembled and is not long; and it is sanguine or of a fusse color or black, then it is necessary that you escape the incision of it. Because there is great peril to the patient. It is therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and of its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument of which we have made mention before; then put the needle into the grape, and pull it down, and cut it at one out of two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and to the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary that you use him of a certain thing to the cauterization of the sense of fear.  And the manner of the cautery is sharp and acute. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confis with sharp live coal, so that it is not too thick nor too light; and using the tip of this instrument, from which this is the form:
And let him have his head a hair or one puts the medicine in it, as the men of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the grape; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscles run from his mouth of the medicine inside, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the back; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the grape, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it curdle and the bites of the medicine be appeased; and if you see, take cotton and surround it with any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the cane above, until the cotton hardens on the grape; and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and fall after four or five days. And if you have need to recommence the cautery of the medicine, then commence it again, and after the cautery wipe around the grape, with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and be rinsed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than incision, or the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take wormwood and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and lavender and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or any of them in one pot, and put them therein, and let boil; and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot have one instrument shaped as follows: And let it be of silver or iron, and let the one end be put into the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the wound by the pipe, until the wound is mortified; afterward resume frequently, until the wound dries, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and make it not except at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, then take a pipe and put inside its head a shard of egg, so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; for the shard of egg does not let the vapor weigh heavily on the mouth, and this is a good cure altogether well-being.
Many times a bone or spine of fish, or something else, lodges in the throat; so it is therefore necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you may move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned into the throat, it is necessary that you make the sick person vomit as long as the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it will throw out the thing airy by vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one morsel of dry bread; and tie to the sponge one thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to its place, it will lodge itself, and then you will pull it out; and if it does not come out by what we have said, then take one instrument of plank according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all come into it, nor thrust in the bone; and it is better that the patient thrusts the instrument, because he knows whether the thing is harsh; if he pushes down, or he pulls up all of the instrument equally, until it is out.
of the bleeding of the throat
No time is medicine given to the bleeding, as I have said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when those do not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, then that you press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the bleeding, so treat it with all i. small pin, or as fine tweezers that are good for this. And if those don't work, then take a sheep's wool, and thrust it into the throat of the patient, then thrust or the tip of the wool i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient remains thirsty all day. Then take a full i. goblet of cold water, and open his mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with your hand often; and as soon as the bleeding feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then smoke the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have said in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, because it will come down without regret. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take i pot where there are burning coals, and let the bottom be covered with a piece of cloth in the middle, and in this pierce the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the stick in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes to the root; and the root will now fall, and if it does not fall, begin the fumigation again many times; and allow the patient thirst, and give him salted things and others, and do not drink water; and then there is need that it be freed by this government.
And the shape of the instrument for treating the root is, when it can be seen, like tongs bent to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a bird's beak, and has sharpness from lime, so that when it takes hold, it cannot let go; and see here the shape:
The chapters on abscesses
Many similarities of abscesses are, according to those that memory comes afterward in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in .ij. ways, one being in its own likeness, and those who hold moisture. And the second manner is for the places where they are on the body. For the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy place are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one should not pierce, as long as the boil is ripe according to its completion; and if some such that it is necessary to pierce when they are mature and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints. Because when an abscess comes near a joint, and it is left until it is rotten inside, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, then pierce it also as long as it is ripe; and it is not necessary that you pierce an abscess mature without complete digestion, except for the one near the foundation, so that it does not burrow deep, and become elongated inside, and there comes a fistula; and cannot heal in a long time.
And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the fever subsides, and the lessening of the pain and the redness, and the suppuration and the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it depends most from the abscess, and where it appears to open more; and be the perforation long in the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pleurisy.
In these that boil, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its fleshy place, it is good that you let the perforation remain as long as it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, the body of the venom will be lengthened from it, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance, the lips and the depths of it will harden. And if an abscess is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it is necessary that you bring small incisions in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, large incisions, and many fends according to the semblance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the heart, and cover; when it has become as one drapel, and is mortified, it is necessary to do as with buboes: and if there are any that are fended in three angles, and if there are any that are cut like the myrtle leaf, like abscesses of the angres; and if there are any where a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Those who have no chief, as superficial abscesses, it is necessary that you pierce them plainly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not drain all the pus in that hour, but drain part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, then do nothing from then on; do this many times in stages, until all the pus is gone. Similarly if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man weakened. For sometimes the spirit trembles with the evacuation of the pus, that by chance the patient dies, and you are not responsible for it. Therefore, avoid this chapter with great care, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and look if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a plain cut, bring lint or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many incisions, it is necessary that you put a pad in each one so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have covered it inward, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint shavings without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then untie it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and a little vinegar, and moisten one drape, and place it on the bleeding site many times.  And if the bleeding persists, then bring governance and care, and the powders that I have said in this book; and if it is during winter, and the skin where the abscess is is very sensitive, then you must put on pads and drapes moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the skin is fleshy, then it is necessary to put on bandages moistened in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and treat it, as it should be, until it is healed.
And this it is necessary to know universally in cures of abscesses: or I have said how one must go before the cures of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
of sores
Of sores
And the boil on top of a festering abscess and moist one, it is lighter because they are of little blood. And if any of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and of these fut i. abscesses that I opened or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as a hard, rough and white stone, and cannot break; and if we had done any, it would have been to her just as well made a wound as a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, where they come from the chief of children and the roots of ears, the opening should be always at the most dependent place, so that it may pass better pus; and cure them as it is fitting.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come from other parts or body, and are numerous, and are joined together. And each scrofulas is properly inside its side, as the others and the abscess of the chief, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are those that are malignant who do not want to obey health. Therefore in the one you see of good disposition at the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and mute from every side and is not harmful to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery or the conduit, and is not very deep; then it is necessary that you open it above, and scarify it on each side, and the two lips of the heart as ones, if you have need of it, as we have said in abscesses of the chief; and treat little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and let not the spatula be too wide or trenching, so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far forward, that you do not open what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and constrain the wound; and leave it as long as the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to pus. And when the bleeding has been restrained, return to your work, until you have accomplished it; then carefully check with your index finger if there remain any small pimples, cut them and cauterize them. And if in the root of the pimple there is a large vein, it is not necessary that you cut that pimple at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and leave it to hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut the whole pimple, it is necessary that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then when there is no more superfluity for the size of the pimple. It is necessary that you intend to cut the root of it, and drain out pus, and sew it as we have said. Those pimples that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears more; and pierce it as the one before mentioned, in dependence, then administer bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with an ointment promoting healing, until it is healed.
of a swelling
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen in our land who made it, and this is the scripture of their word.
For those who have squinancy, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called 'epiglottis' be evacuated; and do not help them by this, because all the veins and arteries of the sick are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two cheeks. When the sickness is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three or four circles, a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the stylet, not in the cartilage.
and those vessels are such that they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis so there is no cartilage and the vessels are long in length.
And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to all the outside, then cleave the keel as far as it comes to the channel; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the channel that it comes from the place that is broken, and by the absence of voice;
and leave the wound open a bit.
And when the hour has passed of which one doubts strangulation, assemble the .ij. lips of the wound of the heart, and sew entirely alone sense the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says one should not do this juice until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault belongs to the wing. Therefore cut open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from death;
and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the sickness has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And therefore they command to sew up the wound and care for it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took a knife, and stuck it in her throat, and severed part of the channels of the windpipe.
And I was called by them to cure her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood which was issuing from it, and well that it had not pierced a vein nor been conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issued through the wound.
I hastened, and sewed the wound, and cured it until it was healed.
and it happened to the lady that she was hoarse of voice, and returned after to her disposition;
for which reason I say that in cutting the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the large throat
This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; the natural one has no cause.
And the accidental one is according to two ways, of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery; And he should be afraid, and it is not proper to work with fire except in this which is small, and the proof and searches throughout the introduction: If you find it like our fat, and cannot to any vein, so cut it, as we cut the others, and treat all its head, if there is any; And enclose well altogether, and treat it as is proper, until it is perfectly healed.
Of ours
Many ways are ours, which I will say all appearances;
and or it is necessary that I say all the difference which is between us and dislocation.
I say that dislocation is sometimes feverish and hot-bearing, as long as the boiling is not passed, and is completed the rotting; therefore rest fever and heat.
With the new one there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains i. a pouch, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as well as a blister, and becomes large;
and are according to two appearances, or gross, or moist, and very colored as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the new [wound], that you feel and examine first with all the instrument that is called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which is afterwards.
And the manner of the inquisition of abscesses of the new is that you prick or most moist place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then it be according to the size of the abscess;
then extract the "entromissoire", and take care in those that are jumping [out].
If moisture runs short, what color it has, do it as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the introduction moisture comes, know that it is fat, so do it in a cross, and take it with tweezers, and lightly scrape each side and guard the coat where it lies so that you draw it clean with the nut.
And if you cannot draw it clean, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times.
and if it remains for a bit, and the wound does not grieve, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and tighten the wound, and put upon it soothing things, warm poultices, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
and if the wound is large, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what promotes flesh.
and if the vein is bleeding heavily or otherwise quickly, and you are in haste, apply a mixture of crushed vitriol, and let it lie for two or three days, until the wound dries, and calms the flow of blood; then return to covering what remains.
See here the forms of the instruments for inserting, and they are in three manners: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are also three manners: large, medium, and small, for encircling abscesses or fistulas;
And they are also like needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and are of yellow citrine, or iron, or silver, and the most useful ones are those that are yellow, and are more proven of black lead to encircle the borders of fistula;
And they are of three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of the probes are of many resemblances, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and so there are probes which have two bends of three ways also;
And so there are probes which have three bends, and are also of three ways; and so there are probes which have two bends, and probes of a single bend only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The head of these things are sharp, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, which we peel the skin for; so that one does not sever the vein nor the nerve.
And of these introducers are the lancets put in handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses.
And they are of three manners: large, small, and medium, as you see.
And one should not use them anywhere else but in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and groins, and similar places.
And at times one does i.e., another instrument small, seeming to cords of fistulas, according to this form, to which one staunches blood:
And one puts it at times in the place which heals with a cutting of veins, and arteries, and at times returns according to this great form:
At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they seem like women's breasts;
and remain ugly and swollen, and who wants to cure them, then it behooves him to be according to this form of this line b. up to .g.: Then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound preventing flesh, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the mother is lying down and is softened due to her size as women are, then make two incisions above, in two similar places. So that one is holding onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form, from this line b to line g; Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of sutures and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or because of the bleeding, then you should fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. and let it remain until it dries up the rest and the grease, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous boils or nodules and there are some that contain moisture.
Those who contain moisture ought to be cut according to this form, from the line b. until the line .g. And when all the pus that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and care of ointment before that as long as it is healing.
And if the abscess is of a resemblance to scrofula, then treat it as we have said in incisions of scrofulas, and if the wound returns pus, then administer cautery as we have said before.
of the rupture of the artery
When the artery is cut and the skin above it is joined, many times abscesses come, and just as much happens to the vein inflamed and with an abscess.
And if one knows this about the artery, then the abscesses are long formed by it. And when you feel it in your fingers, that is to say, extraction; and when this is about the vein, then it appears red fire-like.
And it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is below the armpits and in the groin and neck and in many other places, and it is very large. It therefore behoves to avoid the iron cure, and in the one who is at the head it behooves also to avoid it, and in the one who has an inflammation of artery made from above the skin with long.
It therefore behoves to avoid the iron cure, and in the one who is at the head it behooves also to avoid it, and in the one who has an inflammation of artery made from above the skin with long. then work the incision well, and beautifully separate the artery from the tissues, as long as it is discovered.
then put below it a needle, and have it pierce until the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread in two leagues, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
then point the place which is between the two ligatures with an introducer as long as the blood that is there comes out, and let the abscess be healed.
then administer the treatment that causes bowing, as long as the bone stays. Then cure those with ointment following this, until they are healed.
And if the abscess is near the size of the vein, then it befits you to grasp with your hand that which you can of the abscess to all the skin. Then thrust the needle below where you hold it with your hand, and make it pierce through, and have 3 threads, double, so that you draw it to the other side. Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or with a line of one of two parts and two shoulders of thread
And if you doubt that the thread is not firm enough, reinsert another needle through all the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four lengths
Then cut the abscess until the superfluities come out, then cut the superfluity from the core and leave what is bound
Then put on one cloth moistened in wine and oil, then administer treatments of poultices and ointments until he is healed
of abscesses of the nerves
Also as abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come in the nerves when they are overworked, or by too much labor, and similar things.
And these happen more often in the shoulders and hips and in all places where there are joints, and this is a very painful abscess, and its color seems the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain;
And when one touches it firmly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not at all like a feeling in the body, but under the heart;
and let it stay still in every direction, and do not move forward or backward, or sideways, and the one who is in joints should not be covered by iron: for fear it would contract
and the one who is at the top or on the forehead, make the skin flat with a spatula. If the abscess is small, then hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root;
and if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and cut into it, then drain it and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed.
of large abscesses hanging No time happens in bellies and nowhere else they say, and is a disease that is called “fungus” by the resemblance of those, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are small and very large ones;
and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a fine root, and they were slightly split open, and pus came out of them
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work on incision is that you see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artichoke is white and moist and of fine root;
if the cut is to the hip bone wide, and in your presence be the fire cautery. For at the cutting comes many times too great bleeding, and if the blood does not stop, then hasten therefore to cauterize;
and if you see the patient fearing and afraid of the incision with iron, then take one thread of linen well made, and bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
and then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the linen thread until it heals the joint, and let it cure by itself without work. And if the roots are large, then fear to cut even the belly, but you can well cut half;
then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the flesh which is of pale color and poor sense and of milky appearance.
Because it is an abscess festering, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers afterwards.
When the wound is healed
If the appearance of the wound comes from a cautery of a cut or fissure of the skin, and is on the abdomen and has no boils as it may have in other wounds, or blood coming from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind;
and if it is from the rupture of the skin and the exit of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits. And if it is for the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed to its sides, it rises back up, and then returns, and by chance, it may be tightened, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and for hard work.
And if it is for moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it at all; and if it is for blood, it opens by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity;
and if it is for windiness, it is puffed up when touched, and the workings are that you look to see if its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness. It is necessary that you leave the care. Because there is doubt and fear in it, as I have told you in this chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the boil, it is necessary that you command the patient to hold his arm, and be stretched straight, then seize all around the boil. Then command him to press firmly between your hands, then go around the place that you have seized with all the spatula. then is half of the abscess above to the whole great incision
then work the half of the abscess extended on the thread, and put your index finger in, and search if you find it caught by the thread, then untie it, and bring the intestine out to the outside of the belly
And if you find the boil, then take it at the root, and cut away the superfluity
And if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go well around it, and then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads through them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a crosswise way so that you make it pierce.
Then tighten the abscess on four leagues above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave them there until it pusses, and let the dead flesh come away by itself. Or you cut it when it is subtle and suppurating, then treat it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said.
Or you cut it when it is subtle and suppurating, then treat it as is proper, and cover the abscess as we have said. and extract the blood or the moisture that you find, then cure the place of it as it is required, and solder the place.
about the ulcer
We have said in the division the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work on them with medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron; and let us say that ulcers are created in the marshes, and great caution is needed in their treatment, and ancients said that when an ulcer is in a place where it can be scraped like an ulcer that is in the nipples, and in the groin, and similar places, and it should be completely removed when it is at its beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not appropriate that you approach it, because I have never healed any of them; nor has anyone else ever healed any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion, then prepare the patient's skin well to perform the operation; then cut out your ulcer or sore, and shave it all around, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press the place firmly with your hand or any other thing, and if the flow of blood goes against the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the bleeding is stopped; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron; so it is only enlightened; and one must not touch with iron in these two appearances: namely, tympanites and hyposarches, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this appearance of dropsy which is called "enlightened" by medicines, and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as gout and solution of the belly and similar things; if you do not touch with iron because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease but dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus operate: lift the patient straight up with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the lower abdomen, then take the spine spatula according to this form: And be sharp in two parts. At the point, and nonetheless it should not be so deep that it can come until the intestine when one inserts it, and you cannot pierce it;
Then look if the dropsy is hindered towards the intestines: then it behoves that you split below the belly three fingers straight under the armpit; and if the dropsy is from the sickness of the liver, then let the incision be on the left side of the belly three fingers; and if it is from the spleen, then to the right, and it behooves not that the patient lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow to the weak place.
Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and the spout, and lift your hand to all the spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as when you are scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or a bit more; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to the point eight, and this is the place of the water, then the water flows out, and you remove this instrument from which this form is: And it resembles a fine silver chain, and it is of light iron or steel, and on the lower part one small hole; and where it costs on one side, three holes; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the feather.
At the head above is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now on the instrument; empty therefore half or one-third, for if you empty more than behooves in this hour, by adventure the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit of the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death;
but in emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to those that the dispositions of the virtue of the sick person signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the heart which stops the passage which is on the syfac, because I have spoken of this, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin again the instrument the other day, if you see the sick person suffering those, and treat of the water a small quantity.
do this no day, and keep yourself from watering until it does not remain but a little of water. And if you doubt about the sick person, and you give him much water, then cure him with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bath and in the sun, and he is stained to drink; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
of the stoppage of the penis Sometimes children are born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. If this is so, it should be immediately examined to see if it can be pierced with a very fine spatula according to this form: then put a clo, that is, a fine plug of lead, into the opening, and tie it and hold it for three or four days and when he wants to urinate, have him remove the plug and let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps this will not work, because the urine which comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose opening is small, if they are medicated with the lead plug, as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its place are blue, because none are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the urethra, and this is a serious illness.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies supine on his back, and they support the head of the penis and the scrotum as if it were a feather, so that the opening falls in the middle, as it should; and beware of bleeding which often comes from it, and if it happens, have someone who stanches blood stanch it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
of the blisters of the penis Many times these blisters come in the penis, and it is a bad appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to pick them with one fine needle, and scrape and cleanse them all, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top; then cure with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the blister is malignant, of putrid color and odor, then it behooves you to cauterize it. When you have scraped it, and if the blister is in the head of the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the blister that is inside first; and when it is healed, then cure the outside one. For when you cure them together, it is not certain that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption come in its penis and scrotum; so it behooves to cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply a plaster of honey and flour made of the bark of quince trees and vetives on top, then cure with other cures until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then cauterize with the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with two dispositions together: that is to say, for bleeding and for corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then it behooves you to put or conduct a chain of lead from the penis, and urinate the patient among; and when the skin is sore at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it behooves you to scrape it with one sharp instrument, until the ligatures are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all parts;
And if it is a grievous thing to discuss these, then you must cauterize it with a spatula at the point of the head of the staff and the hair; then separate gently between two, and put one subtle drape of linen moistened in cold water so that it does not dry out.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not like other wounds in terms of continuity; however, when we do this work of our will, and properly to children, it is necessary that we make the best possible work and the most light for salvation.
I say that the ancients did not perform circumcision on their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the most greatest part of the masters and the healers who made circumcision around .i. dal, and as forces, and to one whole novacule; if it was the keurs for he has .ij. toiles, and by adventure if one chops this above and remains that below.
Or it is convenient to cut, and is the pain double, and to the purification which is dou dal is not assured the tip of the member; and to the purification of the knuckle by adventure escapes the iron, and runs the work, and many times they are born as if they do not need purification and I have wanted.
From the modification which is made as forces to all the linen of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, so evenly in .i. all tighten; but that the thread be well stretched around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the rod so much, and then let him move it in every way that you can. Then make him stand straight between your hands, and bring the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow out his breath, and draw it upward until the head of the rod is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below .i. point to .i. other thread; and hold it as .ij. points by the second binding to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the .ij. bindings, then lift his breath upward gently and draw the head of the rod;
Then make him stand straight between your hands, and bring the forces between your hands or below your feet that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow out his breath, and draw it upward until the head of the rod is inside; then clean it well of the dirt that is assembled there, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below .i. point to .i. other thread; and hold it as .ij. points by the second binding to the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the .ij. bindings, then lift his breath upward gently and draw the head of the rod; then let the blood come out point and point, because it is the medicine; and put powder on top and on top of the powder .i. drapeil glued with a mixture of a boiled egg whites tempered with rose water, confited with rose oil good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure it with other cures as long as he is cured.
The form of the forces to the mundification is this: the two shoulders are held and are pointed, and the shoulders are also as large as the hands equally.
The error of the mundification is when the pliers inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger so that the lead makes an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then take tongs, and then cut.
And if they pierce for .iij. days, and what is below the rod is swollen, let it remain until the abscess has calmed, and lightly peel it; then cut as much as you can move, and guard the part of the rod, it will not harm it at all.
Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound with powder, that we have said or treated about powders, and if one cuts too much with the pliers, and it goes upwards, it will not harm; cure therefore, as we have said, until it is healed.
retention of urine
The retention of urine is from an obstruction of the stone, or of congealed blood, or of a bowel, or of new flesh, or similar things, which we have said in the division.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the bladder neck, then it behooves the patient to be bent on his knees; and let their feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from above the back, and restrain the patient's legs as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released.
and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it behooves you to administer extraction with all the instrument that is called "syringe," of which this is the form: and let it be of fine silver, light, shaped like a bird's feather; and let the handle be a palm long and a half, and let it be fine at the tip.
And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie at the chief one pock of wool or cotton, and put the chief of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the chief of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and water tede;
then put lightly the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the bud; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and feel the patient come until the thing empty, and this is not done according to this order further than because of that which conducts or where it goes is twisted; then there is the thread at all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make correct the urine;
and begin again the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of the diseases of the bladder
When scalds or blood comes in the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, so do it with all the instrument which is called "clepsydre," and this is its form:
It is closed, and has .iij. openings: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and its lips curve so that the medicine stays such that it well stops the penis without addition, so that if one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
and when you wish to put your medicines in the bladder, place the chief of the  kettle into the moisture, and draw with the tube which is inside; so draw the moisture to the kettle, and then firmly push back the tube inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of pewter, and the head is higher; and below it .i. finger's width or the length of the arm; then take a sheep's bladder and put in it the moisture with which you wish to enema the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. breasts formed with a double strong cord, and heat .i. handful of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the enema into the anus, then strain your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming in, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
and if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle out of it, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle like one assembles .i. dart, and put inside that which you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it onto the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as rains, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell it to you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens more to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder seeming like water in its subtlety; and it appears hard, and pains the patient's penis, and he feels it many times, and then becomes soft; and with many of these jumps the foundations are formed; and it is light the healing of children until they have four years, and it is very painful in the elderly, and is as the middle for those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purify the patient by clyster, to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines. For it often obstructs anything seeking the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate them and move down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and it comes out once from its place above; then make him sit between your hands properly, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined downwards; then the one side and touch it from within.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut above the stone. And if it does not fall at the touch of all, moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and push it into its base, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, pull it to the neck of the bladder; then press upwards on your finger, and push it outwards where you want to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the testicles in the part where the incision is made; then push the spatula cutting, of which this is the form:
And make between that which is between the buttocks and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be right over the stone, and the two sides should be even or foundation, and let the loincloth be so that it's wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large;
By chance the press so the two sides that are or foundation, that it jumps outward without work; and know that there is such stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is cut to go through; and if it is like a ball, round, whose issue is light.
To that one then where it has angles and margins, make the loincloth larger; and if it doesn't jump, it is necessary that you extract it with tweezers that are also like a file at the head, to move extract the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you put under it 1 instrument subtle curved at the head; and if you cannot engineer it this way, then enlarge 1 pock the opening, and if it is without decortication, then strain with vitriol;
and if there are more than one stone, put the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then the track forward, and the small ones after if there are more. And if it is very large, it should be removed, and make a larger wound. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through where the urethra cannot close; but nevertheless try to drain it, or to break it with tweezers, until you pull it out in pieces;
and when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, and put on top one cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandaging until the third day.
And when you untie it, cleanse the area well with oil and water, then treat it with diaphicon ointment and basil ointment, until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and clotting of blood in the bladder, and because of this retained urine, which is known in such manner that without going out with the urine: then you must put all things in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn it.
Then lift the wound of water and air and soil, and help him in all the ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you care for him, you bind his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the place.
And if the stone is small, and it is where the urethra leads, and it is stuck there, and the urine cannot pass; so cure in this way as I said before, that you enlarge it many times, it is an excuse for enlargement by this treatment. I have already proven it this way.
Take one piece of iron according to this form and be three corners hooked into one stick:
Then take one thread and tie it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod in your hand at the stone point by point, until you can feel the stone on the other side; soon urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the rod. Then it is broken, and it jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the rod straight towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, untie the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stones of women
It happens that a stone is engendered in women, and if it happens at any time, the cure is grievous, and it is forbidden for .iij. things: one is that by chance the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a knowing woman who will uncover herself to look at the stones, even when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is so much deeper than the stone of the man, for which reason it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you procure a wise woman well-knowing, and at pains the true one is found, and if you cannot find her, then no chaste woman of subtility; and present to her a wise person in the affairs of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the incision of the stone.
And look well if the woman is a virgin: then she must put her buttocks or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she constricts it below her buttocks, and recommends that she puts her buttocks or on the patient, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it from great to small from the entrance of the bladder until below, as long as it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttocks, where it appears mued and felt the stone in that part; and do not move her buttocks above or below the stone, and let the tail be first small.
Then put the root in the tailbone, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as long as the stone can be pushed out, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and which have veins. If you know the similarities to know the outcome.
And if the stone pains, put ground vitriol on it, and hold it there for an hour until the pain is extinguished; then return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of stones for men to help you in your work.
And if the stone pains, and it is from the artery that is cut, put the powder on the spot and strain with bandages and cloth, and do not begin again those, and let the stone and do not touch it, lest the patient die; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the limbs are numb, then return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm.
of flesh hernia
Aqueous ramice is nothing else but an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is the substance from the center of the testicles that contains the egg; and it is called “syfac,” and at times it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e., another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and those have this point not.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread.
And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors:  it is either yellowish declining towards jaundice, or red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more.
And these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is white as we have said, so is the abscess re-formed, that is, round like the figure of an egg, and does not open the openings, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the proper cloth, so is the abscess re-formed with a part of the egg, and for this one thinks that it is another egg;
And if the moisture is between the skin of the openings and the white as such, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, you must examine the entire introducer  quarrel, of which the form is before. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is inside.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of this which is inside. And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his strength and the repletion of his body; then lay him on his back, on a thing a little high, and put under him much of cloths;
then sit on his left, and command the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart from the sides;
then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the sides between them from their long side up to near the armpit, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the sides until it reaches the white marrow, and flay it carefully according to your strength;
Then pierce the abscess with pure water to one inch wide openings, and extract all the pus, and then put on your bandages, and raise the abscess; and do not touch the tip of the points, but only the abscess; cut all or in pieces evenly the edge of it subtly, that if you do not cut it well skillfully, the pus will return.
And if the ulcer has healed in your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the abscess; then assemble the two leaves of the tip of the points with a suture, and cure it as the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another malady, then it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, in doubting the flowing of blood; then cut the point to all the suspender, and extract the ulcer, and cure it as we have said.
And if the fluid is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part just as you have done the first evenly, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound clean linen moistened in rose oil;
and put over another linen moistened in wine and oil, and place the two pads on top, and put blankets over them, and tie them above all the linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and use them as padding according to this appearance and be joined by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the thighs lies on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit; and the other two from the head above the two angles, and let the entire restraint be assembled in the buckle of the breeches;
And sometimes this root of cautery is medicated in place of a knife of iron, and that you take one subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the genitals, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac which contains the water is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac with one incision, and scorch it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything; and guard that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salved; and moves guarding against a drop of blood, and moves less than the works of the knife;
and if nothing opposes you, or abscess or discharge of blood or any other thing, so care for what opposes you, according to what is said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then administer a piercing as I have told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said that a watery root is there,
then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of all the spatula wide, and put the piercing long into the body; and let the opening be wide so that all the water may flow out;
then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and leave for it to run out the rest of the water, then treat it until the wound is healed;
and if the white cloth does not allow water to flow into the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you pour in a quill or instrument with which one treats the water of those who are hydrophic, of which the form is as before; and enlarge i. poc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after .vj. months or until then, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass his days.
of the abscess of the testicles
Know that in the section of this vein there is fear in more than one disposition, so it seems to me better that it be left.
and I will tell you the work and appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and also to the joints; and this is for many reasons.
That is to say by excess of sour and sharp, which is spread to the joints, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it finds no pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
and by chance some abscesses are fierce and painful and of dark color, and sometimes comes from out of an artery, or swelling of a vein.
When it is from an artery, then it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. and it should not be touched at all.
That one which is made from a swelling of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of the touch of the fingers,
and one can do well to cut along this manner, and on other limbs; and it is that you cut the heart of the onions, then the leaf is on top, and the stalk is white, and deliver the suspension from all parts of the leaf.
If the leaf is already cooked with these new limbs, then you must pull out the leaf, and cut it.
and if it is airy to the stalk, or in that which is inside the vessels, then you must deliver all of that membrane and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the cartilage is at the rear or front, it behooves you to cut it entirely, and remove the egg, as we have said.
And when the works are accomplished, then apply the wound to wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then cover it with other dressings until it is healed.
of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enclosed in a covering resembling that of a certain onion, with the softening of the testicles. And the patient moves sharply when he goes;
And the cure of this illness is as well prescribed as that previously mentioned.
And nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one elevated seat, then put the suspender of the loincloth down to his heels, To all the vessels which are near the penis, and the masters braid them, and stretch them.
Then cut with the sharp spade widely through the vessels, until they are uncovered.
And then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
Then place a needle where it has one double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein came, and tie it straight to the other end. Then cut the sinews in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and treat the rotten moistures.
Then cure the wound as with others where one prevents bowing, so that no vessel be seen that nourishes one of the corners.
Because by those no evil comes, and to all vessels blood comes, it is necessary to treat the corners of all vessels. So that the flesh does not lose its nourishment because of the incision of the vessels, and dries out and cannot be helped.
of the rupture of the hip The occurrence of this malady is by the section that comes at the hip, or by the extension on the belly in the part of the angles, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners.
and this rupture is either at the hip or of its extension, and these two ways of bad come from many causes: whether by percussion, or jump, or by straining, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things.
and the signs when it is of the extension of the hip are that there is a poke and poke, over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and the abscesses are equal until near the edge because the pus presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the pus, that it brings a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse, under the skin near, and this because of the issue of the intestine and the body to the outside of the pus.
And sometimes these (abscesses) touch with the intestine, and are held in, and cause great pain to suffer to the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these cures of iron there is fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to push the intestine into its place in the wound, if it can enter. then either support it under his collarbone between your hands, and raise his hips;
then stretch the chest upward, and cut all the skin of the groin long; then push inside the folds of the waist tweezers according to what you need to open the wound, and make it such that the intestines can issue out;
Then scrape away the surface skin that is under the skin of the buttocks, until the white underlying layer is uncovered from all sides.
Then insert your index finger into that which follows the buttock, in what is between the white layer beneath the skin of the buttocks and between the second layer.
And separate that which is behind the buttocks and between the second layer. And then move with your right hand into the center of the buttocks, and have the white layer on top to your left hand, and lift the buttock onto all the layers towards the waist; And command the minister to extend the buttock upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament;
and ask your two if it has any point of the intestine enveloped or white hard thing, and if you find none of these things, push it to the belly below.
then take a needle or it has one large thread made of ten threads, and put it in the rear part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the buttock; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear of the threads, until there are four threads. then assemble them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we said is below the skin of the buttock, with a strong thread of two parts. then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them together forming two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter in, except for an abscess coming there. and put directly the linen according to the first linen long two spans of that one, and after these two linens leave down from the side which is under the heart of the groin the large one of a span.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the groin, as much as the sinew, and the bone, as we have said before.
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it on the wounds, and there administer the linen that we have said. And at no time is the white groin that we have said cauterized after the incision, out of fear of a decrease in blood.
For this often happens, and let the thread remain as long as it comes out through it; and if it delays in coming out, so be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it comes out.
then cure the wound with another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
of fleshy hernia
In this practice, I never saw anyone who dared to cure it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a branch that is assembled to the vine, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after the cut above or lightly below.
then cut in the middle, and cure the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
At times a rupture comes in the angles, as we have said, and apart their limbs; and do not send any of the intestines to the groin, and if any are sent there, it is bad, and repair them all hours;
and nonetheless if it remains too long in this point, the wound or syphilis grows, as long as the intestine is sent.
and this happens by the extension of the sinew which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflamed its ends and opened.
and the cure of this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies sideways on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the rupture inflated with a width according to the quantity of three finger widths;
and then pull out the sinew which is under the skin that it follows, then take the lead and put it on the place appearing of the sinew;
And press on the front of the belly, then cut the two appearing joints of the thigh on the head of the thigh bone, and cut each one.
Then extract the head of the thigh bone, and do not cut any of the thigh nor extend any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal hernia;
Then treat it by the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the filaments, if it has a hole and cleans the wound, as long as it is healed.
The thigh is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Many times the skin of the testicles softens in certain men, because the contents within are softened, and it is visible; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened over the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you see it, first sew the superfluity of the softened skin with three or four sutures firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure it like other wounds, until it is healed, and tie the thread.
of the cauterization
Know that cauterization is commonplace in our law, and for this reason, I would like to not speak of it much in this book; it is necessary only in two ways: one is so that the healers know how to respond when asked about it and how to cure it; and the other because we often need cauterization of certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and calves and other animals. I therefore say that cauterization is done in two ways: either by attraction or by incision. In the one we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its testicles are softened and pliable; then taking them with your hand, hold them until they are pulled back and you no longer feel them.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to .ij. ways as men: the one if it is that between the .ij. sexes open as well as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine.  And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin as well as a penis and .ij. sexes. And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the joined parts all, and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
of the tenting
Tenting is a joined part on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. It behooves you to trim the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tongs, and cut it lightly; and do not go too deep, that bleeding does not come, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; and to another part that is born at the mouth of the privates, and the groin, and by chance leaps forth, and is according to the semblance of a cow, and for this reason they call it the ancients "cow disease". If you should cut it, as we have said the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of erratic
of erratic if is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident by illness that came to it; or it is by char ajoined, or by syfac subtle or thick, and it is made in the groin, or in ribs, or below, or where it may be; and prevent conceiving, and childbirth, and by adventure the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the regard of the bailey. If the stoppage is near appearing, if you will at your two sides or to the rear. If it is of subtle syfac, and it is near the .ij. leivres, then hurry, and thus: put your .ij. sides together, and let the woman be on her back, legs spread; then are the .ij. leivres formed, as long as the subtle syfac is round, and is over the stoppage; then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and put it on the place, and lie the woman to her husband each day, so that she cannot stir. And if the syfac is hard and thick, then you must cut it with the spatumile seeming like a myrtle leaf. If the stoppage is of char born, then suspend it to the  and cut; and have the medicines that staunch blood, as com acaice, dragon's blood, incense, together abundant of egg; then administer a caine of large plonc, so that the wound may not join; and thus long, and administer her a tent of dry linen; then be cured with other cures until it is healed.  And when in the groin comes char born, then it must be cut according to this manner, if it is not abscesses enchancrez. For the abscess enchancreit that is in the groin, one should not touch to do.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without custom, and when hemorrhoids are old they become thul; and we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those who resolve healing. I say that hemorrhoids and the thul, when they are em-formed in the marshes, and they do not appear to smell, except for the cure by iron. Those which are at the mouth of the marsh, one can feel, are those one can cure. Thus it is necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then after the thul is seized with tongs, and the cut in its roots, then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as acaice and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then put her feet to the air for one hour, then put her in cold water; and if she decorates from blood, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confide it with honey and aisil, and make .i. plaster on her back. And if it is healing, it is good. If it is not, then make her suck wind suction cups on the back and breasts without hurting; then take linen, and moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the place. And when the abscess rests, cure its place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called «albathir» is red, and is similar to .i. asp chief, so one must cut it as I said the thul; and then cure it until it is healed.
of the abscesses of the marshes
Many ways of abscess come in the marshes, such as chancre and purulent abscesses and herpes and estiomenes and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and more other diseases that I have said in the division. Thus it is necessary that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the marshes, which is not of the abscesses that coil bowel; and if you want to know the work of iron, see whether the abscess is aged at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.  Therefore do not haste to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then make the patient sit on a .i. seat, and have .ij. small seats where he leans, and support his back and bring his feet to the parts further from the leg; and be his hips spread, and put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good linen; then suck him sideways towards the right side, and administer the instrument that works the mouth of the marsh, so that which comes after. And it is necessary that when you see administering this instrument, that you first stick its tip in to know the depth of the marsh, so that what enters inside the instrument does not come deeper than it should, and that it does not injure the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marsh with cloths, so that the instrument does not hurt them; and it is necessary that he puts the cone of the instrument on top, and that he holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and you feel it with your hand soft, then it is necessary to cover it at the head, at the spatumile leit; and when the bowel is emptied, it is necessary that you put in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in green oil sec; and put the tent further from the wound to the depth of the marsh, and put further over the marsh and over the loin cloth clean moistened in water or malves are cooked; then cure it after .ij. days of ointment coming before this, until it is healed; and sometimes lift the marsh and the wound with a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lilies and long aristoloch being cooked; then return to the ointment. And if the wound is renewed in the marsh, it is necessary that you guard against iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
of childbirth
It is first important to the midwife that she know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pushing downward, and desiring to smell the air: then the fetus hastens to issue forth; therefore, you know that this childbirth is according to nature's figure, and is the head first and the buttocks with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so that the fetus issues forth quickly; for when it ascends onto its head, then the buttocks come with it, and the woman is delivered of her superfluities by good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
If the fetus comes forth on its head by natural delivery, and the woman is laboring hard, and her strength is weak, then make her sit upon a saddle, or let the women hold her up; and anoint her behind with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs, the small spatula whose form is here: and cut the secondine, and chop it at its nail until the moisture that is inside is gone; and press the woman's belly as much as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman a clyster of fenugreek with sesame oil; then make her take and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for one hour: so now the child will come out. And if the two hands issue forth, then it is necessary that you gently pull them back and forth; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift her feet up; then tip the stool over onto the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall during the tipping; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then chop the hands at the knife which is previously put, and extract the child, and reset it equally.
from the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to push it upwards. and then he turn it back and forth, until it is even
then prick the place and stretch it back and forth.
It can jump up to the hips, if he commands to take it, and make it sneeze with condition; if it jumps, God willing.
And if it is not healed as we have said, then turn it back and forth, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is lightly.
And if it does not come healed as we have said, then take a handful of alder, and sesame oil, and melted gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and put on the inside of the woman's natural orifice and outside this ointment, then make him sit upright until under the ribs;
and when it is softened below, make him one collar of mire and put it below, and let it stand an hour; then make him sit on a seat, then make him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take hold of his belly lightly, for the child leaps now. from the issue of the child on its knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands poke and poke.
of the delivery of the child which comes out with a broad hand it is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand if one cannot bring it back, then have the woman rise and leave.
If it cannot go, so make a bed on i.e. a lit, and the legs are formed.
Then administer the muscle ointment that I have recounted;
And if she doesn't give birth, so make her sit on i.e. a seat, then study to bring back the hand; And guide the child according to the natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command her to lie down as long as the child is there.
of the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother It is fitting that the midwife holds her hand, then turns it little by little, and the arm lightly;
and when it is even, she places it on the soft, fleshy part of the arm and oil, as we have said, then she commands her to move little by little.
and when you have done this, make her sit on one seat and command her to sneeze. And the girl sneezes. of this same manner to all of the spine
of this same manner to all of the spine When it comes to treating in this way to all of the spine, so grasp the spine with your finger, as long as the moisture is emptied;
and if the child can rise on his face and on his neck, so grasp from the base, that it is not held, and die the child;
then throw the child inside, as long as you have put him as it is right, and command to the woman that she take no care at any time;
of the issue of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two are a strange thing, and they do not live, if one is named;
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the faculty which divides them, which is joined to the head.
and at times they come forth as naturally as one under, as we have said.
And if they come forth with force, then the cure is as we have said, and let the physician be subtle and make it quickly and easily. and do so as he deems to salvation. of many children
of many children At no time are they formed in the marshes, i.e., one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of their glorious sage,
and it is necessary that the bailiff know all this, because by chance similar things happen. so that it be done according to what is proper.
of the dead child
When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands. then it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident or she fears death.
then it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised.
and the minister binds the band of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it is not treated with the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mare with moistened oils with musk of aloe and fennel and flaxseed, then anoint the bail her hands with these oils and these muscillas. then put them in the mare lightly, then desire one row where she puts the stitches that be suitable to these,
and take ward if the child is appearing that it descends upon his head; If he places the cauteries in his eyes or neck or mouth or on his palate or under his chin or in the armpit or near the ribs
and if the descent is on feet, he puts it or pricks and at the middle ribs.
and it is necessary that he holds the cautery with his right hand, and puts the curve between his fingers of his left hand, and pushes it with all his hand lightly, and places the cautery in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the void thing;
then insert against one other bone, or third if you need it, so that the extraction be equal;
and then make it equal in moving from one side and the other, so that it may fit easily, and let the bones be toothed to hold, as this is the form:
And if there remains a part, then apply some of its oil to the ankle, and put it in that part, and draw the other part;
and if none remains, then put this bone or higher up, and do this until it comes out entirely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by constriction, then it is necessary that you envelop it in a cloth, until it sets;
then bind it at the joint of the root or to the cut, and in this way you must do with the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the child's shoulder is swollen and it is inflamed at its opening, or if it has an acute ache assembled, If it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two, and make the chief and extract the water. Or you have it with the instrument which is called “almidach,” so that its form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one.
And in the same way make it if the infant has a great head naturally. And then pull out the bones with the pliers,
and if the head of the shoulder leaps and is forced, it must be split as much as the moisture which is there or worse has issued.
and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can.
and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce it as much as the moisture runs.
And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the cavity is light.
And if it is stuck in the belly or the breast, then you must draw it out with i.e., a cloth wrapped around the hand. and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture that is in it corrects itself;
and if the other members are removed, and the head remains, then bring the healer's hand from the root of the marrow, and pull it up to the mouth of the marrow; then he puts one or two, and the treatment will follow.
and if the mouth of the abscess is retracted because of a hot boil that has come, it does not need to be worked. then it is necessary to administer moist and fatty things. and he administers plasters, and soak in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then administer what we have said in the living child.
And if one has no power over it, then the body should be treated in pieces, and nothing of the second part should be left.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said concerning abscesses that come in the marshes.
And if discharge of blood comes, then put it in water restraining, and administer other treatments to it.
And I saw a woman in whose belly one child had been stillborn, then conceived another upon that one, and miscarried the other. After a long time she had an abscess in the wound, and it swelled so much that it opened and began to drain greatly.
I was called to treat it, and I pondered for a long time, and could not close the wound.
I placed a strong adhesive plaster upon it, and after some days one bone came out, and after some more days another. I marveled greatly, because this one whose belly has no bone.
I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I touched the wound, and in my hands were bones, until the woman was in better condition; and the woman lived a long time thus, and it seemed to have a little bit of bowel from there;
and I have recorded this chapter only for those who, when masters find a strange thing, they know how to help.
to bring the bone back to its place
Here after comes the form of the forceps, how it is made in books; and at two turns at two joints of the two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictive [part], and made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be i.e. two of wide, and the margin of the trees i.e. must, and long one palm and half; and in the middle of the two limbs be two adjustments of this same tube, which are fastened in one and the other, of half palm of long or a poke more;
and these two adjustments are put in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood tube, according to the likeness of pliers; and have two heads of two joints, as you see, an arm's length long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the veins with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then put the two joints together in the vein, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then operate your hand on the instrument as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see to open the mouth of the vein, as long as the woman does what she wants.
This instrument is all mounted and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the eyes have appeared them, so much more hasty is the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you have not appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is held during childbirth, it is necessary that you command the woman to retain her breath, and then have her sneeze from condiment, and restrain her hands to her mouth and nose. and if she jumps for this, well and good.
If this does not work, take one pot and make one hole or cover it, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamine, rue, anise, chamomile, cassis, and wormwood.
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or put in water on the fire; then put one end of the rope or hole into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh.
And steam it until the vapor comes from within the marsh; then let it be exhaled, as we have said. If the second part jumps hastily. And if it remains after this cure, and there is no more force, command the midwife to wet her left hand in sesame oil or in the ointment of alum, and then put it in the opening.
And grasp the second one; and when she has found it, grip it and extend it little by little straightly, so that the uterus does not fall during extraction. But it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come and detach itself.
And if the opening of the uterus is too narrow, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
And if it is not from all of what we have said, then guard that you do not use for milk.
But it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the hip of the woman, then the clysterize of ointment tetrafarmacon.
If the woman will bear and put it back, and come forth well; but nonetheless, when she bears it then comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and pales the patient.
Therefore it is necessary fumigations suitable for that: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the second thing is this:
And it is in the form of a dog, and one puts the head subtle in the nature, and the shoulders wide above the fire;
And let the fumigation be on the coals, and the tinder as long as it is burned, and begin another one.
to consider its foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by some subtle things. So it befits the midwife that she pierces that thing to its proper place, and does not pierce it with a sharp spatula, and guards the incision so that she does not touch it.
Then put on a cloth moistened in wine and oil, then care for the ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it does not close up again, then put on a poultice of flax, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go into the chambers.
And sometimes this stoppage comes from a swelling of a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that swelling: if it is cured, as we have said of the cautery of pitch.
of the fistula of the fundament Fistulas that come from below the fundament are knotty, and larger than those that come from beside the fundament outside, or in the space of two parts,
if there is a fistula or more than one; and when that knotting is old, it works, and still moisture arises white or subtle pus,
and sometimes these fistulas are personal; and they are known by those who have them or when there is evacuation or windiness when the patient evacuates, and by chance one leaps to others.
And if the fistulas that pierce to the bladder, and to the middle of the penis; and reach to the joint of the groin, and to the root of the scrotum.
And thus one knows the fistula piercing at the base, and not piercing: and it is that you thrust your two index fingers or foundation, and thrust a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has curvature, put a tent of fine lead or one hair of a horse, as long as you feel the tent or hair to your touch.
And if you do not feel it, and it does not come out with difficulty or windiness or moisture, as we have said: Know that it does not pierce at all; so hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or to the urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced up to the junction of the hip, then the tendon comes to that place. If there is no torsion and the pain is in the surrounding area, then it is that it has a twist, and it does not merit medicine or treatment by ointment.
And in these fistulas Persians have no other cure except labor, and vanity of the fools who meddle with them.
In those which are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift his legs up to his hips, and have his hips inclined to his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the foundation, then you must put your index finger there.
and if you feel that the tent has pierced it; and whether uncovered or you feel between your finger the soft tissue or cartilage, then you know that it is through. if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
However, one can heal some well, but this rarely happens.
and the help one gives them, if it is to cauterize with subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before. and burn the whole thing hot in the fistula, until it reaches the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as long as you know that these charcoaled things are burned, which resemble an ostrich feather.
and then the cure of tents moistened in butter, as long as that matter will issue forth, then the cure of ointment closing up flesh and binding.
If it is thus healed, it is well. If this one, otherwise it cannot be healed;
and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and between your bottom and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or of silk, and you see the fistula at this one which follows the covering of the heart; if you cut the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then the cauterize after, as long as it comes to the top of the tent;
and will be delivered the tent, and it will fall; then cut those feathery things that seem like a bird's feather, and none remain.
And if the blood vein goes wrong, and it comes between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the fire cautery combines two good things: namely, the burning of those attached veins, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure with tents soaked in butter or in crushed herbs, as long as their pus flows, and until the burned veins are pulled out of the wound;
then heal the wound of inflammations quickly by applying dry hard flesh, and are the medicines dry.
For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes just to the root of the foundation, and is removed from the body, then you put your finger or foundation there, and examine it.
If you feel the tent and between two or three is the fabric or the syfac or chars, where it is near to piercing, then there is no other way except by means of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put a tent and cure it as before.
and do not cut too deep, that you do not cut the tissue which holds the base, and let the secretions come out by the natural will. then cure it as we have said.
then cure it as we have said. and perhaps it will be healed, or you move that covering and the wound after it is cut near the base, or by tent or other appointed instrument; Then cleanse the scabbed flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can
Then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation: so it is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies against the foundation next to the skin above, if you take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And he puts one thread wrong in two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread of that one pierced, just as you put your two or foundation.
and treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to another, and leave it one or two days;
and restrain it no times, until the threads close these cartilages that are between two, and they join;
Then cure the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not become to make for the lacing cover if too deeply embedded, and then cure it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula spine from which one makes the fistula is very useful, partly and trenching. and on the other hand no, because one does not cut what one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to two ways: or they are within the foundation, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and in short they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture,
and moreover over a little bit of water clear or a little bit of blood, and have the color of the body
and the cure of those who have them within the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch himself so that he go into chambers, until the foundation of him is gone, and the filaments appear. if you hasten, and can grasp it with pliers, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots.
and if the tweezers cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them with one cloth, or cotton, or a piece of felt; and straigten them to your hands, then cut them, and powder above some hot powders that are in place of cautery. or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then cure them with other cures until they are healed;
and if the base cannot be issued, then cleanse the patient with a harsh and sharp enema to wash what is at the base, so that it can be issued openly;
and if the patient endures, and if the threads are far from the base, then the cure is light. and it is that you prick them with your finger or tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears incision by iron.
It is necessary that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then lead the thread above and make the needle pierce through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is of a good width; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one to correct the excess of blood.
then put on the foundation one pad moistened in rose oil or in cerate, and put it on the foundation, and command the patient to rest.
and then let him be until they heal, and when they are cured, treat them with ointments and other treatments until they are healthy.
of the drying of the veins or foundation Many times there is a drying up of veins in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Then you should resort to the point of a spatula or your fingernail to scrape off the peel above, so that it does not become moist. then treat it until it is healed as it should
and if it cannot heal, begin the scraping again more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and is scraped then treat it until it is healed.
when it trembles Ants are a small appearance formed before the body, and go much into it.
And sometimes they find them cold, and one feels them also like dead from shivering, and it comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a candle of an ostrich feather, or a raven's feather strong, and put that candle on the shivering, until the circle surrounds the shivering completely; then turn your hand to the whole candle until you cover the whole shivering, and put it in, and root out the shivering from its roots.
And if you see, do this of a dog of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and long above.
Do not pierce it, for must keep to the two, and move pressed And if you see, so cauterize the edge, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the enema No time made one enema of silver or lead, or iron melted or woven; and no time is made of these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Therefore those who are administered in the cure of the children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the enema, small and large, so it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner.
and there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced inside; and on one side are .ii. holes, and on the other .i.;
and it is the belly where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
And between each puncture one must put space, then place in these punctures one strong thread of cruet twisted thread in ten or as it may turn, and assemble the belly like a goat; And when the medicine is inside, then tie the ligature in front with a strong thread, then administer an enema; and this is the form of the circle:
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or egg yolk or something similar, then insert it gently.
Then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together until it is all emptied, then withdraw the enema, and have the patient raise his legs to the side,
and if the medicine wants to spread, so let the hair as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night altogether, so it is greater help.
And if you enema him in the sickness of belly falling, and the medicine hastens to spread, so begin again until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhoids are at the base, or abscess, so let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin is restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by the striking of stone, and the cutting of sword and knife, or of lance or staff or arrow, or similar things;
or what are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members.
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance comes in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if it takes care if it is of a stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely broken and the wound is great, and you doubt heavily of an abscess hot: if it becomes quite healthy from the cephalic itself even if it comes little blood from the wound, and if the healthy is on the contrary side of the wounded;
and avoid the patient from filling with wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to bleed, let his meat be less, and drink no wine, nor eat any flesh;
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, cotton soaked in rose oil only, or in wine stiptce;
and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound, if it is fresh and all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
and if the art has moved it, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a cut from a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenting, then assemble them by stitching, as I will say for wounds of the belly, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and it's hanging loose and holds only by a thread, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in its place of skin. and instruct the patient to eat large meats, like beef and cooked wheat, as well as poultry, and similar things.
And if you find a rotting skin, and it does not reach the bone, so cut all of the rot away, and throw it out, then cure;
And if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which does not close with a ligature, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie up the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and that you put into this powder which binds as soon as the arsenic has healed it.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly in place, until it dries well and joins with all its blood.
and then cover it well, and leave it without removing it, unless it swells; for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
And at no time is this made with only quicklime, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but that the heat has cauterized the wound.
And if the burn has healed the wound, even if it is still open, do not put this powder on it.
but put on some medicinal unguents, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it is healed. then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you here afterward the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
The wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and put nothing restraining upon it, because it harms the nerves and causes them to retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let the medicine be warm, such as calx washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cupped wash also in sweet water. and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then sew it and bind it with bandages, then tend to it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of boil, then pierce or lower them.
And if the artery is cut, and blood flows, then staunch it, and tie it up, and cauterize as necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the airway is guarded, so that the flesh goes. Then sew the heart on the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it back according to its natural form; and then the strain happens to them frequently, and leave him for a few days, then cures with ointments drying until it is healed
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so it will. and if there are pieces of bone, treat them fiercely all that you can, and those that you cannot get, leave until the wound suppurates. and make it free and align the opening;
and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said. And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in my chapter.
of the lance or knife wound
If it is a blow from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look if from the wound there is windiness as the patient strains;  then know that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put any powder on it in the first hour, nor bind it at all for the blood not to settle in depth. and return it to the heart, and apply a bandage to the patient. but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it twice a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture;
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more. if no spasms come, nor bad heart tremor nor twitchings of the arm; and when you see good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with bandages and other dressings, as long as he is healing;
and if it cannot heal, and work, know that there is a fistula there; so treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, or on the back, treat it as those in front.
If it is large, suture it; and if it is small, treat it with powder; and if it is deeply embedded in the bone, and has chipped pieces, then close the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are loose. And if they are not loose, leave the wound to rot, so it will lighten the extraction.
and for other wounds on other members is the judgment as we have said.
about the displacement of the belly
The displacements of the belly are great and medium and small;
Of the great wound there is sometimes protrusion of the intestine, or the nerve of the intestines, by which the intrusion of others;
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one.
for this reason, intestines are put back in place more easily if they are put back in warm after warm; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they go back in place less easily.
and for this reason, a small wound is worse, because for this reason intestines are reset to their place more than other wounds.
And know that a rupture of the belly is in .iiij. ways:
The .ij. common sutures happen in the suture of the belly,
And the suture of other wounds of the body and .ij. other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
And nonetheless they are more clean with the suture of the belly, and I will say one each and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has emerged, and if it is necessary to put something back in, then this is done in one of two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it up in this manner: Soak a sponge or linen cloth in hot water alone, or you cook it in water with squashing and cypress and spice, and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed;
and at no time has this been done restraining, and it is moved that it alone for to deflate.
And when you see the swelling depart, if moist the intestine with water or wine and the leaves be cooked. for by these is aligned the entrance to a little thing.
and if it cannot enter there, then make an opening in the wound with the instrument of which one uses to cut hemorrhoids.
and the first cure is to move the waist that we should not cut there except with great necessity.
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if you cut inside the curve and not outside, and look here at the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails have leapt out. If you put it back according to its natural form in its proper place, if you have the power, because this is very important.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
And also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you set your attention on that which the sunken part be higher than the other;
and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in great and small wounds.
For small wounds put that which has appeared to you,
then have between your hands  one minister pitiful that keeps all the rupture to his hand and assembles the lips; and this is the common manner of sutures,
and this is the common manner of sutures, and that you pierce a needle or more, according to the quantity of the breadth of the wound, then let from the head of the wound i.e., two fingers' width, and put a needle where it has i.e., a good strong thread; and pierce the two holes of the skin with the two holes of the  siphac,
then the strain of a double thread around the needle of 2 parts then assemble the 2 ends of the wound alignment
and then leave 1 two of space, and in it place another needle; then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing this according to what you need of needles. as long as all the wound is restrained;
and are the needles medium-sized, between fine and coarse, because the fine needles pierce all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: for this reason they should be shortened;
and it is not right to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin,
so that they do not cut and open the wound in front of the suture;
and then cut the points of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and I put tents or cloths on the shoulder of the needles to keep them from moving and let them stay until the wound is healed;
and this manner of suturing with needles is more advisable in small wounds, because one needle or two are sufficient
The second suture is so common, and it is that you assemble the two points of the skin and the two points of the fascia together with a needle where there is one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four points together,
and when you will have pierced these four points together, then thread the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews cloth;
and put space between each suture the thickness of a minor two.
this suture should cover the man
and I sewed a wound that a young man had on his belly
which was slashed with a knife and was the wound more than a palm wide, and it was of bowels well two palms wide,
and the wound was in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been 24 hours out,
And the wound was stitched together up to 15 days, and I cared for it, and it healed.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in one place where one could not find any, nor any medicine; and I put half a cloth moistened more on the wound two times a day, and washed it with water and honey until it healed.
I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
Take the needle and thread it from the outside to the inside.
When it pierces the core straight through, hold the tip of the thread or where you inserted the needle.
And make it pierce from the other side, from the inside to the outside.
and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the furrier does furs, and that you leave once the seam of one side, and take it up from the other, until the sewing is entirely finished.
The second manner of sewing, which Galens says properly,
is like that which any one does, who brings the two parts together naturally, and apply one of the chiefs to the other chief, in such manner:
Insert a needle or chief of mirach proximate, and make him feel it only, and leave the two chiefs of syfac; then turn the needle, and make it felt from the outer part to the inner one, as the two shoulders
then make one of each be examined from the outer part up to that inside, in two other shoulders which are on the opposite side
and this is the most common and the best way of stitching
The Galicians say this phrase and no one witnesses it
One must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each one.
And one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
And know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the stitch more grievous than of the others of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it: then put back the intestine and the skin; then put on the powder of ground charcoal
then put back the intestine and the skin; then put on the powder of ground charcoal and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, as long as the wound heals. and stitch up the flesh, and suture the skin, and the muscle. then care for the wound as you would others until it is healed;
and if you lack medicines, apply, as soon as it begins to fester, old cotton, and change it two times a day until it is healed.
Because you do not have need of other medicine for multiple situations while the wounds are simple;
and if you doubt that the wound does not make commonality with principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of temperate heat, or in rose oil, and place it around the angles, and under the buttocks;
And if he feels pain or rotting in the bowels, and this happens many times. If the enemas of black wine are given, and even if the rotting comes to the intestine;
and it is pierced inside, and know that when it's the large intestine, it's easier to heal than the small one.
The intestine called "young" cannot heal when it is rotten, and this is for the placement of veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back in as if it were intestine, while it is fresh.
And if it is old and has become worm or black, then you must tie the place that is black so that bleeding does not come from there. because there are veins and arteries there;
Then cut what is between the linen And put the two pieces hanging from below the wound part until outside to align the extraction when the bone falls and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestines are round, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some men,
because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and from it there were excretions and flatulence;
I set about curing him according to what I could, and did not cease to treat him until he was healed, and the bones joined.
And when I saw it join, I feared that the patient was ill in his belly; and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank.
and they said to the experimenters that when he has a small wound in his intestine, it must be tied in this manner: Take fresh threads to large testicles, then gather the lips of the wound And when the thread has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips,
then put one other splint after in that manner as before, until the wound is completely wrapped;
and stitch the wound. If the chief (meaning perhaps a boil or abscess) swells in the intestine, and there comes no nuisance to the patient,
and if one can tie up the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that be much cleaned out, and then tie to the head of this thread i.e. a thread of linen fine twisted then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and pull it back in the rupture;
and this manner of stitching of fringes is not forbidden except according to the way of fiancé and hope;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the internal joints, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that any wound or abscess, when it opens up, is universally called "fistula," and likewise when it is lifted and bent inwards.
And a fistula is according to the truth a knotted, hard, and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also lifted like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in a clear jump inwards, and sometimes thick; Sometimes little, sometimes enough;
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh it is only due to one of the eight causes:
that is to say, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or because of his malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much swelling; or the matter is rotten, and the substance is of poor quality; when the medicine is not good in the cure; or because the corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late for digestion, and late for health, and inflated by nature; where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments of medicines in the division.
Therefore it is necessary that I make you know the cure for fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the bladder or the intestines or the sides or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are of this manner are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but toil and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come up to the place I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of lead or iron, if the fistula is straight, if it curves;
and if the fistula is twisted, then make a circle with a subtle tent of sponge. for the sponge bends to the tortuosity;
and if the fistula is opened by hand and you cannot well search it with tents, if you cleanse it by one of the openings,
because the moisture goes from one opening to another and cleanses it;
then carefully search it with your power, that you know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is closed up entirely,
and ask well the patient of the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and whether it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the faulty part and the corrupted matter which are inside. and then the cure as long as it is healed
and if the fistula is well deep from right place, so it behooves that you cut it as deep as you can then put moist tents in a medicinal agué, and put them until the head of the fistula
then put moist tents in a medicinal agué, and put them until the head of the fistula until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that is remaining at the bottom
and then I put ointment for strengthening healthy flesh, until it is healed.
and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it away. If a vein or nerve strikes or affects principal members, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so cleanse the king as long as the corruption is completely removed, then cure the remaining things with ointment until it is healthy.
and if it is not healed, and returns bent as before, know that you have not gone far enough yet:
If it is discovered and you want as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, that is well. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot arrive there; if there is no other means than to leave to nature;
and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can draw it out with pliers, if you extract it with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones, extract them all, leaving none behind;
and if moisture acts against you, and there is no error nor fear, if it copes with moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place upon the wound something that prevents rotting, and leave it until the flesh around the bones has rotted,
and therefore they will have more easily the bones
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you treat only the corruption until the blackness is completely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a large portion of it corrupted, and comes up to the flesh of the bone; if it befits to be cleaned and covered all the way to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed;
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may take it as an example and help in your work.
There was one young man about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body.
as long as the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no external cause to open.
but the surgeon by their foolishness opened it too much so that the abscess opened and corrupted a lot of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came a great deal of pus that all rotted and dampened from the body;
and many a man put care on for two years, and there was no sage in the art of hands
until I came to him, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and those that were being healed by the punctures to great extent; and becoming red the body of the youth, and it had a citrine color.
I covered a tent in one of these openings, and then I searched all the openings.
and found that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
I therefore pried it open, and poked in one of the openings until I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone inside;
I was that one who appeared to me of the corrupted bone, and I thought there was no other corruption, except for that which I removed.
And began to restore the wound with medicines soft by long time, and it could not close together.
And then I started again, and uncovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and I removed it, and then I placed it back, and I tried to close the gap.
but I could not do so until I placed it around one palm of the bone, and the joint was forced to its whole length. then I restored him with remedies; and he became healthy and healed quickly.
and it was no longer necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and for the fear of death that I had of him. For bloodletting is often evacuated, but it was cured entirely.
For bloodletting is often evacuated, but it was cured entirely. and in the place of the bone a hard cartilage was born, and was of good disposition and had no annoyance nor opposite in anything, neither to go nor to come.
and extend the head, so that you draw the corrupted flesh downward; and uncover the flesh in the place where you want to see it, so that the skin does not cover the flesh; and put one splint or a board under the bone so as to cover the rotten flesh And it is necessary to be as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be yet another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open at all, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh entirely; then put one splint under it,
And then so from one part to another the corruption, and be the silken thread of the corruption i.e. point, as we have said;
And if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the corrupted joint, and silken thread the bone where it contains on the other part;
And if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, so there is nothing else than to cut;
And if the corruption is or in the thumb of the hand, or in the thumb of the foot, so it is very strong that thing, but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you; and purify it in all the ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve do not make you contrary;
and know that the incisions and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of them, and their thickness and subtlety, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason, it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its instrument.
and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of the diseases; so consider the instrument that you need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder can dislocate due to inside or outside causes.
And when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they are not helpful at all then it is necessary to cover that limb up to the place where the corrosion comes from. if the patient escapes by these of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the member;
if the patient escapes by these of death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the member; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after the blackness, then goes that corrosion of member in member, and takes over the whole body; if you hurry to cover
and if it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar.
if the corrosion is at the top of the thigh, if you cut it, and do not let him any space to come up to the hand.
And if it comes up to the hand, if you cut it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, if you cut it at the [elbow], and if it passes the knife, then it is death. and it is not worth administering treatment greater than the quantity of its virtue.
And thus do as when the corrosion comes or foot: if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes in the foot, then cut the whole foot. and if it goes up into the leg, then cut at the knee joint.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other way than to leave the patient to die;
and the manner of covering or sewing the limb is that you tie it above and below, and extend one minister to the lower ligament, and another minister to the upper ligament, and you cut away the flesh that is between the two ligaments by one span wide, so that the bone be uncovered;
Then cover or so it, and place on each side one drapery of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place and may come to the patient another lesion and abscess.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place thoroughly. or if you put on any restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed
then bind the limb wounded with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corruption first came in his heel of his foot, until it encompassed the whole foot;
And when the man saw the corrosion, he raised himself to cover his foot, and was healed.
And long time after, it returned the corrosion where two of the hand, and he came to me,
and I put on him things  rebounding after the purification of the body, and could not cease the corrosions;
and he wanted that I cut off his hand, and I would not, because I had hope of rebounding the matter; and fear also that if he cuts his hand, he will not die. for the virtue of man was weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land, and took to covering his hand, and became healthy.
and I have recounted this tale only because for those who need it, there are others to be made.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a head in flesh, and remains so long that it causes great collection of pus. And then it bursts and pierces, and out pours the pus, and remains like a vessel. And the skin that is above is as subtle as one thin linen cloth, and does not reach down to the bone nor to the nerve, and such a sickness is called "Sain,"
but if it is so lengthened that it comes to the bone in its entirety, then it is called «fistula»;
and the cure for this is that you cut all around that skin, and also when it is thin, like a cloth; and let it not be closed up because of its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin hardens, and the corruption is not yet complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with this enema:
look if the breasts are large, and the bowel within them smells bad, then administer an enema of Egyptian medicine which is made as follows: Take thus, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in clysters the groin, and restrain the opening; and let the medicine remain for 2 hours, then remove it squeezing
do this many times until the breasts are softened, and fear is removed.
and at no time are they to be clystered with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and you take ashes from the vine wood, and pour water over them
then the flow, and in a clyster, until you know that the breast is well moistened.
and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster with water and honey where there is a bit of litharge ground; or you clyster it with honey and sweet wine, that the honey may have the property of purifying and washing, and wine makes the healthy drunk;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well purified, if the clyster made of what causes flesh to be born in it,
and that you apply a plaster of diaphram, and make it with rose oil and wine; or you can medicate him with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties or treating ointments.
and if the opening of his chest is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter there, then widen it with iron a bit, and put inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilican ointment, until it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, so leave it just as much space where the clyster can enter
And if the opening that lies above is lower, then cut or more below where it is. For when the bowel is in its entirety, do not leave any entrails inside. And if you cannot cut below the breast as you see fit, if it is set up in such a manner that the bow comes to the lowest place that there is,
and if you cannot cover the breastbone as you see fit, if it is set up in such a manner: that the bow comes lightly down, and nothing of the bow is left; and take solidifying medicines to put on the chest,
and are placed over i.e., a linen cloth that covers the whole chest; then close with force the opening of the chest i.e., somewhat larger than the first then apply ointment suffused on another cloth according to the quantity of the opening, and it is placed on the opening of the chest to align the rib, and do not remove the large drapery outside except after many days once;
And the one who is out of the opening of the chest, is often removed to remove the rib, and know what comes from the rib, whether it's venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take heed if the patient feels pain or none, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been spread out in this manner and you see nature leaping on top of the wound if you know that the breast will close soon, and approach the health.
and then untie it in the morning, or at midday, and when you untie the wound if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bowed indigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, so do not despair of health,
for health approaches. For there are men whose wounds heal slowly in their flesh, and some who do the opposite;
and if a breast lies bowed, indigested after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
and if the chest takes long to heal, and is swollen, then apply medicines drying moist in substance and drying in virtue, as ointment of diaphnetis, because it contains a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take ointment of diaphnetis, and make it with rose oil, and the rose of old wine equal in substance;
then confit it and use it; and the same made honey well cooked enclose (them); When a swelling does not disappear
or you take mire and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on the honey when it is over the fire. and then put it in cloth, and place it on the chest, and once administered one long ruler and roots of lilies celestial, which is also as flour of quince and centaury;
and roots of lilies celestial, which is also as flour of quince and centaury; and in the use of simples or composites: grind them, and make it into powder, and put on top of the honey that I said, and use it. and if the cure is lengthened, and is not cured by this cure,
and if the cure is lengthened, and is not cured by this cure, then you know that corruption is deep in it, and makes impression on the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the angle
A carbuncle is an abscess that arises under the finger joint of the hand, or in the foot, or by chance arises in other parts;
and when it is neglected and one does not take care of it, then there comes one abscess after another, And they will run and twist the bone as long as they run to the root of the joint, and perhaps they run it all the way.
And the corrosion comes to the bone until there is pain and it is the shoulder twice as wide, and the color is purple.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all, then it is necessary that you cut with iron all the superfluity which is remaining from the joint, Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy;
and if the nail follows the flesh inward, and it begins to prick and blister, then it is necessary that you put the root under the nail that pricks the flesh, and the top end, and cut this carefully and lightly. and put above the remaining of the meat medicinals hot and corrosive to remove all;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out, and treat it further, for as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the bone corrupted, cut it in one of its parts as it has been said before. then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is broken and swollen, and causes great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the bone with a spatula by cutting across from above,
And guard that the tail does not come near the flesh which is below the angle, for the patient would feel too great pain.
And if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints that are born in the hands of some men by chance are all fleshy, and by chance there is sometimes where there are bones, and some time there is a nail,
and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in no one of us two. He who is born in neither of our two does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance may move;
The waist of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: Waist it at its root with a broad spatula.
He who is born in the root of the joint, so is grievous to cure; so keep you from cutting.
In one who is born or should be at the last buttock, it is necessary that you cut first the fleshy rounding until the bone, then bind the bone to a suitable cloth then care for it until it is healed
The sutures that come as two together come from birth, or from the soldering of a wound, or from the burning of fire, or from similar things.
If it is necessary that you bind that suture so that the parts return to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths moistened in rose oil so that they do not adhere. Or you put between two pieces of subtle plank, until the wounds are soldered together, as is fitting.
The soldering comes to none of his two with the palm, if it copes that soldering as is fitting.
Of villains
Those are veins large wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, that come in more than one member of the body;
and more often occurs in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Therefore it behoves you to administer to him once purging of col, and then the salve of basilica.
The cure of iron is done in .ij. manners: one is with the cup, and drawing forth the black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein, and draw it out completely.
The hip is treated this way: first, raise the leg with very hot water, until the large muscle becomes tender, then pull the leg of the patient from above the hip to just below the knee; then cut open the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, of a wide size,
then let the black blood flow out and draw it with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much muscle is exposed as the virtue of the patient can bear;
And then the wound, and he commands that he lay upon it black pitch-infused meat;
And recommence evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the leg is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it in a bath, and raise the leg of warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bain, then heat it at the fire, and then place it on the vein long from the head to the knee, or in the part below to the ankle;
then work the leather to the incision, and scarify the vein on each side, until it appears when you feel it.
and it is seen red and black, and when it enters or the leather seems as if a white cord;
then bring the point below, until it is lifted from the leather, and then put it lightly on the incision.
Then place the knife in another location above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift it to the root, as you have done before, and place it on another incision, as you did at first.
Then make another cut, or more if you need them, then lift it, and cut to the bottom of the foot.
Then trace and lift until the second incision; then extract it incision by incision, until it is all out, then cut.
and if you cannot draw it out and raise it, then put a needle to all that is one. and the thread and pull it out, and put under that one right, and turn your hand from one side and the other, until it comes out; and keep that it does not break, because if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out nor raise it, and it comes to annoyance for the patient;
and when you have drawn it all out, then put over the place of the wound wool moistened in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone is compressed and crooked and enveloped all together, and it is not straight, as we have said, if it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to cover the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cover the vein;
and is of a large curve, for if it were fine, it would cover the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in land that has no moisture;
and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in the legs, and this occurs due to rotting that comes under the skin,
as it comes from within the body of serpents and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then the color changes, and the vein begins to rise out, just like the root of a plant.
When the shoulder opens up, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of plank from one and a half to two fingers wide, and the knot,
and leave the plank on the leg, and every time that it hurts on the outside, then wrap around the plank, and the knot. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is fully grown out. For if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, and bring forth abscess and rot there, and a bad illness.
Therefore for this reason it should be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body.
And sometimes this vein when it is treated is 5 palms long, or 10. And one man came to me, from whom it had issued out of 10 palms in length, and when you cut it, it put out 1 ray or pit, and it pierced until the bottom
So that all in issue; and let be emptied the matter that is within, and administer to the place medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then the cure like the abscesses.
And no time at this vein main reins, and same when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot. And there comes much of pits, and from which it jumps reins; cure then as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This illness is called in our land “ox disease,” because it often happens to oxen,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body moving up and down, and one feels it well by the way it travels from limb to limb, as long as it reaches the skin where it goes, and then leaps further;
and is caused by rot of some humors, like those that come from serpents and worms and parasites in the belly.
And one doubts its malignancy, because when it travels through the body and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, perhaps entering, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and drained, if one can only flee when it goes:
so therefore it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong ligament tightly.
then cut above and treat the wound, and if it is drawn too far into the flesh, and you do not find it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
and the greatest harm that it does is that it inflames the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold under it the eyebrow form, then cut above, and the wound treat;
and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body with medicinals soluble for the bad humors corrupted.
and if worse from meats engendering putrefaction.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This sickness is called "vakirir" in our land, and is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and after that, I saw it rise as if a worm to the shoulder, More quickly than anything else, as if living silver when it departs from its place.
The pain departs from that place and settles in the shoulder.
And then a little while after it spreads throughout the whole body, until it arrives in the other arm;
then she told me that it returned again throughout her body, as I saw it.
I was amazed greatly how she moved thus from limb to limb, for I had never before seen this illness in this manner. However, I had seen many who well had moved pain from one place to another, but I had never seen it like this, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and veins uncovered, and because of this, that constraint appears.
and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious and who have moist bodies and veins returned.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if it lies above and below evenly, and then cut upon it as much as that constraint appears to be in its place. and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the cure of those who discharge wind, such as foul pills, and pills of serpentine, and similar others.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small ones, and hairy, and joined. and some that have two angles, and those that have tongues, and some that have parts; and some that fall in any member, if it falls in two ways: either in the principal member
...such as brain, heart, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appear to you: then it is necessary that you take care in the extraction of this arrow, because death comes afterwards in many situations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not entirely embedded, then treat it, and cure the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the dura mater which is on top of the brain, It is when there is scotomy and sode and esvertin and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. And perhaps it is without power from the nostrils, or the ears; and perhaps he loses speech and voice; and leaps from the wound moisture white seeming to poultices, and leaps also like burning charcoal;
And if this sign appears to you, then hold off from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is still there.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, are that it is near to the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not empty; And by chance the seventh moves also like the pulse, and in short black blood, and comes coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: So then knowing without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of the seventh that does not have a vein is that without any foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and gasps loudly and seeks cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the small ribs; and gets great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and they move all the members of the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps something from the undigested flesh leaps from the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and nothing of straw comes out through the intestine route, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine comes out mixed with blood, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and auxiliary and spine of the back and groin and hips and legs, and the seeming member, are safe according to more arrangements. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for this reason that you do the same thing.
It happened to one man with an arrow shot or falling into the root of the nose: I tried it, and withdrew it from another side under the fat of the ear, and was healed without any sense or pain.
And treat with a game an arrow which fell into the fat of the eye below the paper down. and the arrow was returned, and one could only reach its point toward the shaft and the arrow was large of a Turkish bow, to all one and a half lighter without ears; the game was healthy, and nothing bad happened to him.
And treat an arrow of the throat to a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow with ears:
I was the bristles, and I subtly traced until I betrayed it, and were healed the Christians.
And betrayed an arrow to one man, who it was in his stomach or belly, and thought that he would die;
and then that after thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I removed it, and betrayed it further, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man whose arrow fell or struck on his back, and the wound was sewed up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor finds inconvenience in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewed up;
and remains so suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in a man of princes the king, who it was stuck in his thigh. and was a little declining on the right side; and the arrow was completely drawn back
I was called to treat it after three days had passed. So I found the wound very narrow
I felt it to be a very fine tent, and did not feel it at all. And he felt a prickling and pain below his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on its place a plaster atrifical and digestive, because the wound did not swell. and appeared to me the holes of the arrow.
and appeared to me the holes of the arrow. I put the plaster on his hand that day, and stitched up the wound straight, and the patient remained so for a long time.
until he felt the arrow i.e., one day inside his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound medicine agu corrosive by hand that day, until it was open,
and the feel, and feel the head of the arrow which is becoming set in its place; then I adjusted it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me.
and it pierced well the ends about four months;
and then I widened the wound so much that I put pliers on it, and mine on one side and the other, and it could not slip out.
therefore do not cease to be subtle and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day pliers well made according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I worked on it and restored the wound.
And the mirrors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was soldered together, and the patient was healed completely.
Or I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows. So that you put your care on those that I do not say, because the books cannot comprehend everything;
but the wise masters compare very well to a small thing, and to those that are present and lacking, find new works, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things which happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not found in members where they are fixed except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or from another place;
and that which has gone further than where it enters, is an arrow entering into the flesh, and it has never come out again.
And if it has not yet come out, leave it as long as the flesh is rotten around it, and let the opening be clean.
and also if it is set in bone, and it cannot move, then leave it so for some days, and move it each day;
and therefore if it leaps, and if it does not leap, then pierce around it, that is to say forest subtly, until the ligaments around are spread, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body and it cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the entire tent. And if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;
And if you cannot because of the constriction of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein, then make an opening as large as the wound; and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrowhead by which it is held,
and remove the arrow if you can, and if it has ears in the arrowhead by which it is held, if you loosen the bone that is enfolded into two parts at its center as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can extract it;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can extract it; and do it subtly so that you don't break the arrow, but rather extract it more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then lay it until its surroundings are softened, then treat it, because extraction is easier. And if the flow of blood goes against you, then administer what we have said of the treatment in its chapter.
and guard yourself from the incision of the nerve and the vein, and put everything as you can to remove the arrow safely,
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and put the patient according to the form that he was when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help that there can be, and if you cannot do it, put him according to what the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another part, where one sees or feels nothing in it, or the skin is swollen.
cut then upwards, as long as the tongs can take it, and then extract it; if it jumps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if the arrow is stuck in it, pull out the entire shaft;
and if the shaft has fallen and you see to administer binding, then administer one tool of hair; so that the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the tool; and then pull out;
and if the arrow is lodged, one puts i. instrument with a pointed end into it, to help in the extraction.
And if the arrow is encircled, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then cure the wound as is proper.
And if the arrow falls in the hip or abdomen or bladder or ribs and it is nearby, and you can cut into it, then cut.
And guard yourself from cutting the vein and the nerve, then extract it, and then sew up the wound if it is necessary; and treat it until it is healed.
The shape of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to the beak of an eye, and look here at the shape:
And there are many varieties: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Of the veins of the common body Of veins from which one is healed there are thirty-one, of which it has or head sixteen.
That is to say: two veins that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbesch"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose. and the two veins that are on the neck. and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins from which one commonly draws blood are five in each arm.
One is the cephalic vein, and it is on the inner side of the arm, and the common people call it "the vein of the head"; And the middle one is called "fascia" and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic vein, And the common people call it "the vein of the heart"; And the basilic one is on the outer side and the common people call it "vein of the belly," and it is on the fossa and it is the one that we open which is manifestly apparent on the pouch
And the sap vein is the vein which is between the ring finger and the little finger, and it has two veins;
and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins: one of these is below the curve of the pouch of the left costal and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg; and the vein that is called "ness", which is in the ankle of the other leg.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are behind the ears if it helps with old catarrs and migraines; and the quality of the saining, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient
and the quality of the saining, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a vise until the two veins appear behind the ears in two lengths depending from the head: and where you feel the pulse below your shoulder, grasp it;
then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all the way up the vein and cover and the skin and the vein well two points to traverse, and make blood flow as much as you see;
then restrain and tie it, until it is healed;
and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
The draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for ancient migraine, and suddenly, and inflammation accustomed, and to the body of the tears sharp to the eyes;
and the qualities of blood are such as I say: and that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear openly; and feels the pulsation below his throat, and then  becomes filled with blood.
Then lightly raise the heart above the vein toward your index finger, and thrust the lance below. And lift the vein upward, and the cup, just as you have done in two other veins, and draw out blood according to your need.
Then release the patient, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
And then form a bandage, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about this and their cuping and their extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is worth as much as the bloodletting of the cephalic for ancient face diseases, and for migraine, and for redness.
and its quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting it, until the vein appears. then take the instrument which is called "flogger," whose form is:
And put the point on the vein, and hold firm with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; then bind the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never open it with a wide flame.
However, it is not proper for the flames to be too large; and to heal across, because the bone is close, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the nose, and the cheek, and to the orbicularis oculi muscle, and to diseases of the face.
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient straightens his neck by twisting with a band, as before.
Then the healthy one, and let it be healthy through the length, a bit of the long of the flame a bit wide, because there is no flesh there.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps it breaks; then make a correction of blood, as much as you need it, and then tie up cotton, and tie it well.
The vein opening of the neck is good for fever, and for sore throat, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old.
and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then pulls his nose with his left hand and takes a subtle long flame, and places it between the two nostrils in the space. for the vein does not open well until now, and the blood will begin to flow now;
and do not let it flow too much, and make it flow blood according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The sap of the two-fingered vine helps in the treatment of the alaine, and at the beginning of measles, and in many diseases, and in emphysema, and in corrosion, and in herpes, and estiomenes.
and the qualities of the sap are that the patient strains his neck under both sides, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sit on one seat,
Then cleanse the vein with a long point broadly, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as is necessary.
Then redo the other part in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and restrain both veins moderately. so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, that the wound be cleansed.
Of cleansing the limbs The blood of the veins of the lips above helps in collecting in the mouth, and in the corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and sores and ulcers.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said. then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left. and you know them by this that they are black, and by this that around them there are veins small black ones: Therefore, one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are doubtful.
Therefore, one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are doubtful. If one takes the largest of each side, and also make two veins that are above and below, for it is the same manner.
Of the vein beneath the tongue The vein beneath the tongue helps after the cephalic vein, and it is for the tightening of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
and the qualities of the veins are that the patient should lie between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks down on each side a black vein:
then feel one and the other, and do not go too deep into them, because beneath are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which are commonly bled from are felt in two ways:
either by pricking at one or all  a single, fine vein like an olive, subtle as it is, as you say, and it is called "the ansel"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and tightness of the veins. The form of the flame mirror is very well-known, and it is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening veins that are flat with large visible blood, and which contain large and troubled blood; and this is the form of the olive-shaped flame:
and is more subtly pointed, and is for healing veins subtly, where it has subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that are under the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the belly;
and it is necessary for the healer to heal wisely, and that he be wary of the artery which is under. And if he cuts the artery, and a flowing of blood comes, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said; and should not at all be pricking flame, but cutting as a knife.
And if the basilica does not clearly open, then it is necessary that you restrain it, and change another. or you want no vein of it, or you  sane in its place the vein within the arm: it opens clearly. and the cautery to the knife as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the vein, then it is necessary so that you extract the arm, that you touch the place as long as you know the pulse; then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with a sharp knife.
and be careful that you do not wound the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is of the artery; therefore avoid it.
And if you see it rise up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery. Hurry then, and put your leg on a long length [of something], then remove your leg if it is without stiffness, which many times happens.
bind his arm and leave it so, and do not move it the patient; and be on guard, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the limb is not stiff and it pains him, and the medicine is not present to you, then cut the artery if it opens, because the head of the retraction; and stiffen the limb.
And take a bark of pistachio, and make it into a paste, and take one of the halves and bind it well up until the next day.
If the bleeding stops, it is well; if not, cure it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
And the stopping of bleeding is not always achieved in all positions for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The vein's blood flow in the middle helps that it treats blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic veins, as we have said;
and it is necessary for the healer that he feel for the nerve which is below, and if they are pricked too much, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the wounds become sore, and perhaps it cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cleanse it with the instrument of healing; and withdraw the nerve to your power.
And if it has a vein between the two nerves, then make a cut along it.
The bloodletting of the head helps, that it draws blood from the head, and aids the eyes.
And it is proper to bleed by pricking at the olive vein or the myrtle vein, for this is the safest of all the veins, because it does not have any nerves nor artery.
However, it is proper to seek the lightest spot, and it harms nothing if one fails the first time, and one begins again. And by chance swells the veins in some men, when one fails the first time, but it does no harm. The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about bloodletting, is that it is administered only for the sake of health,
and to ward off future illnesses; and let the bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are or cut: namely cephalic, femoral, and basilica; and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent on Monday, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears.
and one must bleed on the first day or the third day, after two or three hours of the day.
The bloodletting that is administered to the sick has no set hour, but when there is need, it is done every day or night, at all hours and at all times.
and one should not bleed children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying child from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not let them bleed those who have passed sixty years.
And when someone wants to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the bowels with a light enema. If he has much phlegm retained so that the veins do not draw out the superfluous impurities harmful to the principal members;
Do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, until they have sobered up, nor the dropsy.
and if it is worse after colic passion, and vomiting, and stomach upset, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, vigil, and fasting, and that which all virtue, or by thing of the arm or of the body.
then subtly bring them to balance, if it is thick, through meats and drinks and medications, if you have the power for it.
Then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly thin the blood.
and drain the vein of the lower arm at the third part as we have said.
And guard yourself on that day of labor, and of thrusting, and of lust, and of similar things.
And be tied and joined, and let the healthy hand be higher than the one that is treated, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then loosen the bandage in the middle, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct itself;
And then rub the area with your hands, until the veins swell and are felt.
Then moisten the veins with a drop of old oil, then place his finger of his left hand upon that vein below its place an inch where he wants to bleed. so that the vein may not be broken and made worse by the iron. For there are veins which are as thick as cords when bleeding, and some that are full of windiness. so that when one puts the cautery upon it, it retracts from the cautery, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of those.
and if he opens the vein, if the wound is too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the healers be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, it begins again a little below where it was previously, as long as the lesion is not inflamed.
And if the lesion is inflamed and the patient fears, let him leave it for one or two days, and not tie up his arm. For by chance an abscess may come; do not let him bathe then, afterwards begin the bloodletting if he wishes.
And if the opening is small, or the vein is too fine and you doubt that it isn't as much blood as you see, so apply fire to that same opening straight into the flame.
And work a little gently, so that the eyes are inflamed; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, then do not begin the bleeding again, and put a little bit of oil on top, because it calms the body's blood and is good in this place the oil.
And thus administer the oil to every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and the same thing happens to the same bone when it is put back in place; so subtly the sinew and departs when it is too big.
And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is not drained except for the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hurry, and put on top a sponge moistened in water and some hot oil, and restrain it for an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the bloodletting from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days without any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm him; and if you see it, put on no thing of aloe or frankincense made into juice of calamint, mint, or similar.
And many times abscesses and appearance appear at the shrine of the basilica: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then is that appearance evil. Therefore shun that you put on anything of those we have said, for by chance it may be without the artery; but make one plaster dry to harden the place, then heal with another cure, until it is healed.
And treat each according to the quantity of their virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it ooze until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it subside until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
And it befits him who is pale and weak, and needs the extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
And to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it befits him to bleed less and often, and he should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from a decrease in blood and damage to the nerves, and is better than bleeding from a long or wide incision.
And to the one whose body requires the bloodletting, it is fitting to give moistened bread in pomegranate juice; if he is dried out, treat him with blood three or four times.
And if he is of a cold complexion, moisten the bread before bloodletting with syrup of quince, or with syrup of honey aromatic with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
And if he faints at bloodletting, after the issuing of some blood, it is fitting that he imbibe broth of meat and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for the opening of veins.
And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed another time, if it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued strength.
And who wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has strong flesh, he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And who wants to bleed from another place, they must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood in his body which is already exhausted, and brings on fever; so it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening as far as it will go into patches. since you cure all the conditions of health, and put your hand on his arm when it is healthy, that death may not come in place of pain and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent;
and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated, and draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on it; and if it is curved, let him extend his arm fully, for this would be bad;
but let it stay until it heals the second time; or if you prick it with the tip of the flame, until the skin which is frozen from the vein is gone. and put on top i. point of oil returned to a liquid and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess is calmed.
And if there is a need to draw blood the second time, let it be drained in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein to draw blood from the arm is located in the place of the vein at the head for that reason she is composed.
And the manner of drawing blood from it is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red.
then be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then draw blood now through it, neither from the wide nor the long side.
and let the opening be wide, and draw blood well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot flow out, put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood in the water until you have enough.
and if it is in summer, do not reapply the hand in hot water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer
and the vein of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
bind the hand, and put it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one can see it; and if it is cut across, and if you cut it through completely, it does no harm.
and do not cut too deeply into it, because the nerves are underneath all the flesh exposed.
and then put the hand in hot water, if it has become numb within the wound, and cannot be moved.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then place oil and wool on top of the vein to soothe it, and do this for each one.
The vein of the left hand is as good for the disease of mice, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
The vein of the saphenous is as good for all the illnesses that are below the body. just as diseases of the groin, and retention of flowers, and illness of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the qualities of this vein are that the patient puts their foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it bleeds and binds above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there go many veins;
so then one should select the largest vein or at the ankle, which he thinks best.
And if you drain it above the foot, guard yourself from the nerves that are below, and drain it transversely as well when cutting; and let the flame be annealed.
And if he cannot insert it, put the foot back in water, and allow the vein to drain well.
And if the needle is needed the first time, start again the second from above a bit, because the vein is salty. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do the same with the soft tissue of the other foot equally.
The vein of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle of fire, and its puncture is worth to the pain of the hip when it is for hot blood.
And the qualities of its puncture are that the patient lies down in the bath and is pulled upwards from the ankle 4 fingers' width while twisting.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then heal it in every way that you can, and across and it is better that you cauterize it, because the flesh is dry, and it is much restored by men's hands.
and it is better that you cauterize it, because the flesh is dry, and it is much restored by men's hands. And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens or below the foot, and towards the small thigh, and guard the nerves;
and do as much cauterization of blood as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; now she is healed.
Of the sucking blisters
Sucking blisters are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suction which is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is with heat, or without heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the windpipe below the chin; and the windpipe from the two shoulders; and the windpipe above the hips; and the windpipes within the two arms; and the windpipes of the two legs; and the leeches on the two ankles; and suction treatment does not deal with blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh,
and because of this it does not weaken one as much, as is done with bloodletting from a vein; and it should not be administered, neither on a hot nor cold fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of disease it must be suctioned, or for customs, then we administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and midway and at every time;
for there are some who, when they need to vomit, have a heavy head;
and those who suffer from fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are some who dream, and see through blood and bruises and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is emitted from the month, we command to ventilate after three hours of the day.
The blood of the muse helps to the grievance of the head... which comes to the eyes, and it does not suit that this be after the evacuation of all the body;
and this ventilation is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic,
and it does not suit those who are of a cold complexion to use it, or who have phlegm, because it causes them great discomfort.
and for this reason it is not proper that the elderly use it, nor those who have or cold diseases.
And those who heal with this, often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
The suction applied on the neck is in the place of the vein from the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is worth it for the treatment of the pleura. and to the opening of the channel of the peritoneum, and everything, and to the repletion.
and there it is necessary to not push too hard, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause obstruction in the stomach and heart.
The venting of the two ribs in the neck is good for pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
and it is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the healer that he express his hand when putting it in, so that he doesn't cut the artery and there comes a discharge of blood.
The venting under the chin is good for mouth ailments, and gum rot, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for illnesses that come from heat and fullness.
The ventilation of the groins is as good as three veins of the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient not to pierce them too much, because they are bare of flesh, and there are nerves and arteries beneath.
The suction cup which is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the base, and for diseases of below, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and be of iron, that she has need to well suck; and perhaps, if she were thin, she would break; and in this I make great wounds.
The suction cups of the legs are helpful, because they draw blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the knees, and of the bladder, and relax the flowers; and are in their place at the .ij. shins, and the .ij. ankles, and all the same they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in more dispositions.
The manner of putting the suction cup is that you put it first empty, and suck temperately, and put it steadily, and move equally, and do not cease doing this, until you see the place red and inflamed, and appear the color of blood; then finish, and put back the suction cups, and take ward in the disposition of the body, because there are such who have tanned flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, then it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to gently open the way of the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, then it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we only prick once.
And if we want much blood, then we start again often; and if the vein is thick, then we prick it deeply, and the end is that the hairs are pierced suddenly,
and it is necessary for someone who has thick and hard skin, and who have many pores, that you oil their places with cupping jars of an appetizing and dissolving oil: If it is inflamed, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seed;
And if it is weeping, of cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, then take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if the one who is being treated has tender skin and large pores, then it should not be put on oil at all;
but it is necessary to wash after the aeration of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or china water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, rises from ease with myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or buckthorn water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
and it is not necessary to suck blood before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after suction.
and it is necessary that he lie down when he ought to sneeze and when he is sneezing. And ward off those who are jaundiced when they are ill and if their skin is too dry and inflamed; then it is necessary that he eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce at the meal, and similar things;
and to drink juices of cucumber and  beef broth and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and quince, and quinces and small eels and sparrows;
And on the day that he will be weaned, he must drink more than eat;
And it is necessary to give no man at any time triacle or musk before or after the weaning, to comfort the main members; and let the wine be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
The cupping glasses that are put on without hurting are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the groin and the hips and the hip, because those members do not suffer to be hurt on their skin.
and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb as we put on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we put cupping glasses on the belly and groin to lessen the swelling of the member;
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when he is placed upon the liver and on the mouse when there is retained windiness.
and these cupping glasses are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes full of boiled water.
such as in diseases of the lungs, and in this manner one fills the cupping glass with hot water only, or with water in which herbs suitable to this have been boiled.
The form of the cupping glass administered with fire is as follows:
And have two boards of wide breadth and half a palm in length, and have on the side toward the middle one small hole, as for putting in a needle.
and let it be of iron, soft before so that it does not pierce the patient when putting it on the limb;
And have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a candle set.
and let them be large and small according to the illnesses and the age of those who take them;
for the suction cups of children are other than those of the old, and of the thin ones than of the fat.
And must one thus place this suction cup upon the limb:
embrace the candle of wax or one linen cloth, and put it within the suction cup on the side that is inside the suction cup, so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup that it does not burn the patient;
and then place it on the limb, and those should be on the opening we have said, so that when one wishes, there goes the vapor, and remove the suction cup.
and take up the lining as before, and begin it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup therefore which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, in all sharpness, has no rod nor opening, and is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only so much;
and this is the form:
Suckings are administered only to members where one cannot put cupping glasses because of their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar ones. and in their denuded flesh, such as two or three, and others similar;
and the qualities of the user are that when you find suckings which are in clear sweet waters without bitterness, take them.
and put them in a nut of sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing in their bellies; and then let it be cleansed with a lancet and a suction cup, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on herbs.
and when they are flat and have fallen, if it is the place where a suction cup can be put, then put one, because it helps a lot after.
If not, lift the place carefully and then with water, very well, and then press it;
and if the place heals too much after the herbs, then soak one cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the swelling is reduced;
And if the wound is multiplied, put on it pounded vitriol, or alum, and similar things, until it is stretched.
Or you put on the wound half of peeled beans, and let them stay until they dry on the wound, so it will now stop.
And if you need more, take other beans.
And if the beans will not be taken, rub the wound with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the pus comes out. and then put them up, and as soon as they feel the blood, they become inflamed;
and when you see that they are oozing, sprinkle on a bit of alum and soot powdered, or ashes, then they will now stop.
Here begins the book of fractures
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoring of fracture and dislocation.
Know this, dear child, that the matters of this chapter are not found in any of the ancient books, nor has anyone ever read them.
And for this reason, the knowledge is kept secret in our land, because I have never found any good one.
And I know nothing of it, except by the knowledge of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I have mastered the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
It behooves us therefore to say or prologue of this book the sum of the word and chapters where the sages put his understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and learn it to others.
I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the sick person on one side and the other, if any thing does not them quickly, as weakness of body, or child, or old man.
or if the pain is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold meats, and meat of lamb and goat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill himself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; then return the sick person to his first government that he has used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and belly of beef, and eels, and fresh fish, and red wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment they regain strength and the fracture heals faster.
And know that the bones of the old and decrepit do not heal well nor join together according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, large tendons which are held and join the limb together, until it forces as it was before; and to that point of its work, and for this reason, it is necessary to nourish him with thick meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there is a fracture that goes to the side and another that goes to a point, like the point of a pen for writing.
For there is a fracture that goes to the side and another that goes to a point, like the point of a pen for writing. And if with fracture, and fracture to a small crack entirely.
And for each manner it has its engine, and its instrument proper in the restoration, according to what memory comes in its place;
And is known the fracture of the bone by those that its end is twisted, and opens well outwards, and feels in pressing with the hand;
And when there is no twisting nor feeling at touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, if there is no fracture;
but it can well have torsion, or fracture, or small breakage. If you should not move it by hand, but put on the remedies that come after here, and then restrain it carefully.
And know that the fracture which goes in the arc, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together equally, so that abscesses do not come.
And if abscesses come there, then let it alone until the abscesses are calmed for no day; then set it straight to the joint as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of those where there are pieces; then restrain, as it befits afterwards.
And if in the bone it has broken pieces, two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small limbs, or two cords, or one cord and to your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken limb are exposed, you skillfully move all the additions into their places as much as you can, and keep that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if it is arranged nicely, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscess hot and contraction to the limb, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, so warn the patient well that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner. And watch well that the limb is so assured that he feels no pain at all. For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it behooves to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
For when he feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it behooves to put it in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and guard that it be placed straightly, that twisting come not when it is restored.
And the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
For there are little limbs, such as arms and legs and similar things: so it is fitting to envelop them with cloths of soft and fine linen;
and those who are thick, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard linen, because the wide linen embraces the whole large limb, and restrains it from all parts equally, so that there is no gap;
then tie around light splints, three or four tours according to the limb, and restrain your hand a little on all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain less, than the fracture and then push away the fracture a little;
and soften the linen little by little, until you reach a large part of the healthy place, then take another linen, and turn around directly above the broken place;
then return to the part below the fracture, and restrain it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first place above;
then put between the bandages of linen or cloth, until it is all equal, then bind everything above.i. with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is a swelling or abscess, put something soothing for the abscess on top that removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days;
then restrain with your splints, and be of half a width of a broad cane properly cut, or of wood from which one makes the cleats, or of palm branches, and be according to this figure;
but it is necessary that the splint placed on a fracture be a little larger and wider than the others.
and also as long as is necessary for the limb of small or large size;
then fasten on the splints also as you did in the first hour, then tie them above with a thread evenly, just as in the first hour on the fracture;
more tight is it above, less below; and it is necessary that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their cords from linen twisted too finely, and this is a great error, for the thread cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not be that between each star there be less than two fingers' width of space.
And if the patient is irritated by the edges of the stars after the tightening in their healthy places, then put under them pads of linen or wool felt so that it does not become inflamed.
When the wound is with a break and the tendons are broken, I will say about its cure here after.
And know that it is not fitting to set all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is great, it is not fitting to put on splints before after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of a boil coming about hot.
And see here the manner of ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and it is that you take flour that stands at the walls of the mill, and confide it with an abundance of egg, and put this confection, neither too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in more dispositions, and even to women and to small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three pieces of ginger, laudanum, nutmeg, asafoetida, and Arabic gum and myrrh and aloes, each  five; alechil eight, and make it into powder, and mix it with a good amount of egg. If the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to more men.
Another manner of ointment that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana .x.  z.; myrrh and aloes, ana .viiij. z.; acaice vi. z.; Armenian bollic .x. z., and grind well, and confit with water or the white of an egg, and administer.
Another manner of ointment for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and it soothes the pain that occurs, and the use of the bone, and the bruise: take new wool, and moisten it in lard and oil cooked, and put it on its place. This plaster does not restore anything, but it is good to soothe a hot abscess, and remove properly pains.
Another manner of ointment which restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves, and earth laurel leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of ointment for the restoration of bone fracture and to lessen the remainder of the abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of quince, each one part; and grind, and confit with wine, and if the limb is scabby, confit it with moist coriander water, or with water, and use.
Another manner of ointment more forceful than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and flax seed, balm, melilot, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Galen says in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only a certain thing made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and that it should be between two soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen that one must put upon the broken limb, to restore, things dry a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another way of making an ointment that is good for the injury and pain: take mugwort and chicory of men chopped, or feathers of bird, and wormwood, and equal parts, and grind them, and make it into an ointment and apply it.
And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if not, do not loosen it for many days.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, no rest, or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the ointment now; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased; Then let the member rest an hour, then put upon it dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it on with a bandage, until you are sure of the heat of the abscess.
And let the inflammation of the member rest, and be removed the pain, then begin again the fine dressing, and a little plaster, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and make it subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is closed and red and pain and swelling are entirely gone, and you have need of plaster and linen, then begin again as you did at first equally.
And if nothing comes to the member of what we have said, then do not unbind it except after 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7; and no time leave it for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the breakage heals and approaches the alignment of the flesh above.
therefore he restrains more than before, and strengthens his flesh, as I have said before; and if you see the place drying more than is necessary, know that no nourishment can come there; therefore apply hot water to it, every time you loosen it, and slightly remove the cloth each day;
for by this work the nourishment to the limb is cut off, and it mends slowly those that do foolish things, who leave the limb twisted; it is bad, and so is this work dangerous, and I see nothing else than to leave it and work it straightly.
of diverse ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are, and diverse shapes, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made by the thrust of a sword, and the collarbone all the bone until it's surface which is below the bone, as it is done with hay or staff; and for this reason, this kind of fracture is called "haywire".
Or the sword strikes the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and is the wound of these two fractures large or small.
And if there is an embedded percussion, or splitting or of the collarbone of stone, or of the cheek on stone, or similar things.
And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the skin that is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound that is set back in the bone as subtle as a thread, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
And if the wound that is made either by a stone striking, or by falling, or by something similar, and drives the piece of bone inward, and it is in the place like how blacksmiths do when they forge on the cauldrons; so enters the piece of stone inside.
And this happens more to those who have or whose heads are moist bones, like children's heads;
and there are all these kinds of fractures that small pieces are torn away from them like stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by the retraction on them, and the examination of tendons, and by the corrupted cartilage that is on top.
The appearance of capillary blood is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs on it, the black fracture appears.
In the cure of the fracture, take heed of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and eyes staring and reddening, and other similar things in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an escapable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
And when the broken bone first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it behooves you to remove the bone before the fourteenth day, as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone may not rot and bring about the accident that we have said.
And if the fracture of the bone comes as far as the membrane that covers the brain, then it behooves you to split the cracked portion thus: and take hold of the head of the injured patient gently, and expose as much as you can of the bone and the figure of the wound more carefully than you can.
and if the bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or abscess, then help them as it is fitting, and that you fill the space with soft cloths soaked in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess is calmed, and be sure of no more bleeding; then begin to carefully remove the bone, and this is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut in a narrow section before, and this is the form:
And then make one other incision larger than the first.
And the second manner is that you have a number of incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron, and in working lightly, so that you do not cut the bone.
And if the bone is hard and out, then it behooves you to pierce it through, so that you administer splints with drill bits, not more than that lest they pierce beyond the bone of the test, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, which does not allow the point beyond the bone; and you should have several more, so that each comes in its place to the width of the bone, so that you have drill bits for all tests; and this is the form of the three kinds of splints:
The qualities for piercing through the broken bone are that you put one drill bit on the bone and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill bit elsewhere a little after, and so do all around, then cut with the cutting instruments the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly as you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments that you have like tweezers, pliers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the dura mater.
And when you will have the bone pierced and treated, then it behooves you to remove the piece of bone which is remaining from the bone with any instrument similar to a cutting tool, but it behooves that it is more durable and subtler than the other cutting tool;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, then the bones are lightly moved with i.e. instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galen says, which is drier; and he praises it much, and this is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears open, so that when you have uncovered that part, then you place beneath the head of this lens-shaped incision tool, for this is its form:
And do not dig in one part, and it is the part sharp on two sides, so that the cutting edge is toward the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be well guarded of the cloth that is beneath;
If it is attached to the bone, then the bone should be gently lifted, for it is well raised without pain, and without fear.
And if the bone fracture does not reach the skin, and the bone is broken only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to remove that asperity and remove the scales with a fine razor, of which you must have various quantities, in order to administer in each place the most suitable one, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you begin with large razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease until it is well.
In each of the other capillary cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer the cause according to its placement; and this thing is not returned to him who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you take one piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not injure the wound, then administer above one other linen, and do not restrain it more than just as much as it holds the wound only;
And let it remain so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of vetiver, and powder of incense, and arnica, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer further medicines mild without biting.
and guard that the wound be well clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor do you leave there any assembling of flesh, for when flesh assembles upon the brain's covering, it corrupts and becomes sore, and happens to the patient great malice; for when one puts upon the soft thing biting, it stings upward.
Take ward then, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, so is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackening does not come there except for the medicine that we have put upon it, that its virtue has, then it behooves you to take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and glue one drape, and put it upon the soft thing; Then the cure of ways of cures that it is necessary, until it is healed.
Know that no times are broken the two parts of the two above, or one by the alone, because they are two bones; and this below is cartilaginous, and does not break at all, if not forced to bend or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you place your little finger or between the two bones, and put each fracture inside with your index finger, and to the pouch outwardly, as long as the bone returns according to its natural form; and do this gently, and guard that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and it cannot come to its place, then you must put it even at the head of a stick somewhat thick.
And if the fracture is of two parts, make another splint, and hasten to restore it the first day, if you can.
if this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has calmed, then bind to the head of the knee ten thicknesses of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the thicknesses be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
And said any restorer that one must moisten the tents in butter, and change each day. It does not seem to me well, but it is proper that they be moistened in the confection of egg yolk and powder of mill; then leave the tent, as long as the bone is hard, and the cartilages hardened.
And sometimes one puts in their place goose feathers instead of tents, and so with i.e. one sheet of cloth wrapped around it, and holds the bandage, and breathes the patient amongst; do as you wish.
And if the abscess comes to the new ones while you are working on it, if you put cerote or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in one poke of diachylon.
And if an abscess comes, put a plaster from outside, of sesame flour, and incense powder, cooked with egg white, then put light dressings on top, and do not tie them too tightly.
And if the fracture of the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then remove it with suitable instruments, then stitch up the wound, and cure it with things that help to heal flesh and bones, and plasters and ointments that are suitable for it.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with bandages, and put in pieces of cloth, until it is healed.
Of the jaw fracture
When the jawbone is broken below and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is outside only so much, and is not broken in two, except that it buckles inward, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is in the right part, that you put your index finger into the mouth of the sick person; and if the fracture is in the left jawbone, then put your index finger of the right hand, and push the fracture inward lightly, and fix it with the other hand from outside, and make it even.
And if the jawbone fracture is separated in two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a rupture, so restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone cerote, and put on i drapel double; and put on the drapel a great estele well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, so untie it on the third day, and then reset what is changed; and put a plaster on top, of powdered mill with an abundance of egg or sesame flour, after which you have removed the cerote; and put on top of the plaster light linen, and if the plasters dry up, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times it is healed in 3 weeks.
And if an abscess comes, so administer what we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward no piece of bone has been removed; so subtly of the bone with instruments suitable for this.
And if the wound is narrow, so enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, so close the wound, if it is wide, and put upon it one plaster suitable for this, to hinder flesh, until it be healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks many times in front, towards the shoulder, and the fracture is according to three manners: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is like this when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the broken bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each of the fractures to your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be neither appearance nor blemish.
And if you need to extend it more, so put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be thick according to your need; and gently lift the bone, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you put each of the fractures as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder back with force because it comes in front, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his side, and put under the shoulder one hour glass, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
And then address the fracture to your two sides, and if you find it fractured, then it is necessary that you split above; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any mounting, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to guard against displacement:
And it seems like a spoon, and is not at all curved, and be as wide as it is necessary, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are certain of the abscess hot, then cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, then apply the wound with dressings and bandages, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, then moisten one cloth in rose oil and honey and wine, and place it on top.
The setting of a bone when it is without wounds and without cutting is that you place on the bone a plaster of milled powder and egg yolk, and put light dressings on top, and put a spear under the seat, if you need it; then take a very wide bandage of one palm in width, then put one double cloth on top of the dressings and plaster; then take a thin board three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandaged area, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and put the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage on the neck, and lower the healthy shoulder, and lower the broken shoulder; and reset each part, and when you see that the splint holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward them every day, and when the ligaments relax, then restrain it.
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps i. small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the arm up; so it will relieve the fracture of the shoulder by aligning the shoulder, or you bind his arm to the neck, and do not unbind it unless an ill accident comes, until xx days;
then recommence the splint, if you see that he needs it, and restrain it and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored in the most at xxviii days, and in less time for some men.
of the break of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or its place is loosened, and it is not known by any force; if the apparatus is placed according to the figure of the break, and it is reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on the place powder from the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on .i. double drape; then put on a broad and subtle splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is uneven in any part of the shoulder, so apply those uneven parts with linen bandages, so that the splint lies evenly; and then restrain it with a very strong bandage tightly, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the bond every day; and every time that it softens, so restrain it, and put back the splint if it is outside its place, and let the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder is restored in .xx. days or in xxv, And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that easily moves out of place.
And if a piece of the bone has gone forward and is not below the heart, then do as follows, and apply the bone, and do what we have said in the break of the collarbone to soothe an abscess hot.
of the fracture of the foot
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; but it often breaks at the outside. And when it is broken in the middle, it declines toward the toes, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of support, and thirst, and perhaps vomits blood, and the bones are well exposed in the broken bone, and it smells foul.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and put one cushion between the shoulder blades, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the sides of the two bones with your hands, and skillfully brings them together in all ways that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put plaster and bandages above the fine layer of salt, or some other light paste, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the band around the back, and restrain it firmly, and reward every hour the bandage, and if it loosens, tighten it; and if it needs to be untied, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten then, and untie it, and remove what has come from the bandages, and address those things in ways of healing; then reapply the bandage, and restrain it until it is healed.
of the breaking of ribs
Know that the breaking of ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the head within, and they bend only for that reason because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry on the two sides.
And the restoration is that you place equal the fracture, as it should be. And then put the plaster, and restrain it with a splint, if you need it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning inward, the patient feels very great pain and pricking, as well as from pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and also pains, and coughs and vomits great plants of blood, and this is of grave health, and the ancients have placed great engines upon it.
And if some say that it is necessary to administer meats that swell the belly, to bring the rupture to the outside.
We do not do this, except for hot abscesses if they have not come. And if they have come, then treat it.
And they say that some put suction cups on the spot to suck out  fluids, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup pulls out superfluities to the spot for the arrangement of weakness.
And they say of you it must cover the place with wool dipped in hot oil, and put a tent between the ribs to make the flesh equal, then be cured from the cure of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which pricks the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it behooves to split on the place of the broken rib, and it behoove to put under .i. instrument to ward off the syfac; and henceforth one must trench the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the .ij. lips of the wound, if it is great, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. And if abscesses comes, so put on cloth moistened in rose oil, and put on the place; and cure while the place of that which it behoove abscess, and be lying softly on the side where it should, until it is healed.
of the break of the neck
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take heed if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in many cases, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pulled and poked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one takes care of him.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take heed if his legs are softened, and if the accident is in his hands, and on his back there is windiness and ejection without volition; and when one has him lying on his belly, there is ejection without volition. And when he is lying on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor well in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then the thing is lighter.
And the cure is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, so put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, until it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and tie it with a band, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, as long as he is healed. And if any bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover the wound; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with one suture, then cure it with ointment inhibiting flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," then put your fist from your left hand into it, and set it equal to the other hand in your power, then put on the plaster and splint on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are bones dislocated, do this, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Sometimes it happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, it has not happened from a little weakening at the top; and making long, and declining to the side, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and tingling, and swells what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as much as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the figure of it; and if the fracture is at the top only, put equal to this fracture, as long as it is in a natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, put the patient on his belly, as long as the restoration of this fracture becomes apparent to you. And when you would have it even, put it upon the splint, then put upon a strip of wood or of bark, and restrain the splint so that it does not move; and apply the place under the ribs, as long as the limb is even.
And command the patient to sleep upon his healthy side or upon his back.
And if an abscess comes to it, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and put upon it what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and restrain it as it is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is that which is between the elbow and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
And tie the two heads of two ropes together, and lift them up, and place the patient on one seat; then place his broken arm on top of the stick, as far as it comes to the armpit, and make a curvature in the stick, then put on any heavy thing or minister's extend it down; then put the patient's fracture equal to his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his stretcher and ties his hand to his neck, then instructs two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture in his hands, and the other holds below by about a foot, and extend each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more forth, restrain .i. the linen under the fracture, and above the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put .i. linen medium under the seat, and .i. other towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, it is necessary to put .i. linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the top, and on the side; then place equal the fracture, as it is fitting, and restrain it, if an abscess does not come there.
And if an abscess does come there, do not restrain it until .vij. days, and put on linen half in oil and rose oil, until the abscess has calmed; then restrain it, and the manner of restraining it is that you place the plaster on the fracture, then assemble the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and restrain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm be in its place of stars, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you doubt that the bone moves, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. two of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the fracture .iij. two on each side; then restrain on the splints, in the same way as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less by moving away.
And if you see the setting of the bones, and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess hot, so let it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the bandage, that itching or swelling does not come to the place, or the sores can not come to the limb for that it is too much inflamed. If it is healed, as we have said.
And if no such accidents come, so do not unbind until after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or the bandages are softened; if it is healed by the virtue of medicine, and give him the meat as we have before set forth, in such manner that the meat be at first thin; and when he begins to regain strength, let it be coarse. And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be taken back in forty days altogether; and then one must unbind and administer baths and medicines of ointment for the place to heal. And if the constriction is bad and entangled, so delay unbinding for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fossil," because one is small, and that follows the socket; and the other is large, and that is below, towards the little toe; by chance breaks the large fossil alone, or the small, and by chance and both together.
When the small fossil is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large is broken, it is the healing bad, and more grieves than when they are broken both together. If it is the small fossil that is broken alone, then it is necessary to gently extend it, and put even.
And if it is the large fossil, then it is necessary to restrain more strongly; and extend it on one cushion, and hold the socket of the hand higher than the others, and the small toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient be crossed on him himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers of his arm to the part below his hand, or to one linen, and some other ministers to one other above. And then put the mirrors even, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is any dislocated that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make it as above with the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, then glue it i.e., a bandage of cerate made from rose oil and white wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and cover it with a bandage subtly, until the abscesses are appeased. Then remove the cerate, and put on a poultice of ground powder with abundant egg, then place the splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more inward and slightly wider than the others; and know that there must be six splints or braces in more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and tighten it more above the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less distant, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages which are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the ligature after a few days. And if some bad accidents happen to the limb, like itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water, until the itching is calmed; and let the limb not be allowed to rest at all. And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones loosened, and similar things, then address it.
And if you take care that the nourishment cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it so for some days, until the nourishment returns, and then restrain it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not unwrap it until 20 days, or until when the skin heals, then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his shoulders be equal, and beware of movement and fidgeting, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
of the fracture of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and among us there are few fractures, and it comes but rarely many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or sprained, it behooves the patient to sit crossed and straight before him equally; then put his hand on the board stretched out, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and place them equal in size, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
And if the fracture is at the base toward the belly of the palm, make a ball of cloth and command the patient to tighten it on his broken palm; then strain it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as hard as the palm of the hand, and strain it, as it behoves.
And if the fracture is at the outside, it behooves you to put a splint above and another below in the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand and close the connection between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the two bones, if it is a pouch, put it equal, as it behooves; and restrain it with the plant, and if you see fit to put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and not move; and if the fracture is in the other bones, such as in the index or one of the others, put it equal, and tie it with the healthy bone which is after; or you tie them all in one holding, that it moves well, or you put a splint on top, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of an abscess, hot, and dry what comes from it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and one sees it well when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is so-and-so, that is, one above the fracture, and one below. And the patient lies on his face, then extend each minister his limb to his equal part; and this is when the fracture is in the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one limb be toward the heel, and the other limb below the fracture. And also if it is near the knee, and then be the limb toward the knee, and the extension downward; then put the mire the bone equal with his .ij. hands, until it be according to its natural figure, and then put the splint, and the tie, if abscess does not come.
And if there is an abscess hot, let it be soothed then return to your work and your treatment; the bandage is made in such manner. It is fitting that you wrap upon the fracture .i. bandage hard doubled in .ij. or .iij., and in keep the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the shin, and put .i. long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and let the head of the thread go up; then turn on the leg and on the hip the bandage, then put on the fracture splint, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip of cloths soft to put even the pressure, then begin to tie firmly .iij. or iiij. above the fracture; and as much as it goes up above the fracture, and less the restraint; then take the .ij. heads of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and bind .iij. splints that are above, then return to below to the head of the thread, until you come near the foot; and restrain it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there comes no abscess nor swelling nor other sign.
And if it happens, let him untie it, and address those that come, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, it is fitting to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, it is fitting to split the place, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it be healed.
And sometimes the hip is broken in this way, as with the shoulder and arm; however, in this restoration, the patient does not ring any bells.
And know that the hip is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the knee's vein
Know that in the knee's vein there are few fractures, but it often bends. And if it breaks, it is only a fissure, or one opening, and it has both wound and no wound, and this one feels well.
And the restoration is that one puts equal those who are rounded to their places, as long as it is assembled moves as one can; then put the splint, and put on it a round piece of wood, if you need it, and restrain it as it suits, then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other wounds, as hot abscesses and similar; so put to each accident what suits him, until it is healed.
Of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, for one is called right "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures as it comes to the arm, and because of this the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns in all directions.
And if the small bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns downwards. Therefore, administer extension, and set it straight, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, it behooves that if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, that the extension be lesser and lighter; and the splint according to its strength.
And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of seasoned wood that support the leg on either side, and be long from the knee down to below; then wrap them in two layers with one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this juncture, the leg cannot incline to the right or left, and thus it is good. And no one administers a single stick along the length of the leg, and if it is wood, it is placed on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done is this in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; and cure thus until it is healed.
of the fracture of bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but to the bones of the foot comes often fracture and at two points, and there happen only a few in more situations.
And if there happens fracture of the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he would like to walk, and then put your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press them until they return into their places; then put the splint and bandages on, and put under the belly of the foot a small board to 2 finger spans wide, then restrain the foot with a bandage, then when you have wrapped the bandages and other things that you need.
And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones aligned, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are some of the bones broken, restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one finger more wide, then put under the foot that table that I have said, and restrain it well; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in .i. cloth of linen, and restrain the table under the foot; and let it stand on the top of the table before the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said to the other fractures, as we have said; and cure each accident as it is necessary.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, so she sit down enlarged, then incline it to the part of the back, and be held from behind; then fill the cavity of nature with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then take out the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, she removes the cotton, and when she has urinated, she puts it back, and so do for seven days or around: so will be restored the fracture, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cane to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the cane form, until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then be filled with cotton, and leave it so for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the finger of man or woman is broken, it is restored as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures near are not hidden from those who put their study and use to them, and understand my book. For the fracture signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: therefore listen.
In the member, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and put it in the member; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will be healed quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healings that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then retain the vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscess comes.
And if an abscess comes to it, then let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it for three days or four, because you would bring evil accidents upon it.
And if the broken bone is appearing on the uncovered chest, then it befits that you put it lightly in its place with your hands, with small extension.
And if the extension is not readily available to put it in place with your hands, then resort to this instrument which is of iron, which is .vij. or .viij. long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary that the maker makes .iii. or iiij., according to what he needs in each cure of a fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member during your work, and let it be tapered at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, like this:
And it is called "palainche", for which reason the curved part should be placed on the head of the apparent bone; and then you push it once, so that it revives, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot properly take hold of the bone, then it befits that you cut the head of the bone, as long as the instrument has purchase.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either a knife or saw, to your power; then reinsert what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so until it is in place, then moisten one drape in black stich wine, and properly if it is in standing; and do not put on the wound anything else or oil, lest it cause rot and corruption; then administer splints once you have restored the bone, and leave the wound open, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the break; and many times have fools done this badly, and have brought upon the patient either death or decay at any time; and let the strapping be softer and more supple than for other breaks.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not fitting to put splints on; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one or two days a bow forming to the wound, then remove what you have put on all wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and sound.
And it is necessary that the limb be supported in such a manner that the bone fits together lightly.
And if this day passes, and it cannot be joined but returns into place, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you cover the wound with a bandage, and remove all these loose pieces that cause pain.
And if a fistula or other kind of corruption comes to the place, it is necessary that you treat it according to what is said in this chapter before.  And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bones, and similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death results from it, but leave it until it may decay; by chance it will fall out after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
of boils which come from the swelling
They often come after the health of the fracture, even when it's near the joint, and it is a bad thing to see the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot do the limbs its natural works.
Take ward therefore if it comes to us: if it administers topical medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaice, and similar things, in the way that you take any of these things, or all together, and they confit with a stimulating wine or with yolk of egg or with honey; and put them on the knot in poultices, and hold it well, and do not untie it for days; and then untie it, and start another one, until the nodules are removed; or you strain onto a piece of plank well made; because the properties of the plank are that it removes all swelling from the limbs; and if the nodule is already converted into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, so cut above it, and make the superfluity appear; or you reapply it to any razor, until it is removed, and the cure as long as it is healed.
When the bone fracture is restored, and afterwards the limb remains weak and thin, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly and not tied as it should; or because there were too many bandages and the member could not come back to its proper function; or because of excessive swelling; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat and make his body soft, as long as the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and pleasure; then put poultices on the limb so that the poultice attracts great movement, and the swelling often of water comes down, until the movement returns to the limb; and it returns to its natural figure.
The member twisted after health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and brings great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the knots and the torture are fresh, then it behooves them to be raised with hot water, or softening herbs are cooked, such as leaves of wormwood, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the one i. make a softening plaster, such as diacoylon well made, and you take the poultice of wormwood, and confit it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take figs grease, and grind them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that lessen swelling.
And no times is the knot removed by rubbing continuously and lengthily with wet hands. And let movement be given to the limb every hour.
And if the twisting is ingrained and hardened, like stone, and need be to remove it with iron, then it behoves to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put care and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation is from any joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is poorly formed, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now necessary to bring back without bracing.
Because if one delays, it swells the limbs, and by chance if it is put back with pain in its place; for this reason, it does not become necessary that one moves it at the hour that it is swollen; many times brings on spasms and other pains.
However, when this happens, if the patient has been bled, then let him be left until the abscess is calmed; then apply the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each member as the wound comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head down to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens sometimes that the jaws become dislocated and the dislocations are in two ways: either they are a little bit out of their places and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the cheek, and close the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by many more positions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, then you must reset it carefully, and do not complain at all;
and in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of 2 parts; and the other two hands be outside, to put it equal; and command the patient to soften them, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the minister puts it equal, until it returns to its place.
And if it is brought back (re-aligned) painfully, even if it is the two jaws together, apply hot water and oil, until they are gently moved; do not hesitate to bring it back, as we have said.
And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, put on moistened cloths in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with soft bandages;
and let the patient sleep on their back, and their shoulders be between two cushions, so that they do not move them to the right or left, nor do they try to chew, but take light food until the pains are gone, and the jaws are healed;
and then gently move what he wants, and do not try to open the mouth to eat or drink, until the mandible is well set and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be set in place within an hour, and are not returned to their places, then come fevers and accustomed swellings, and perhaps a belly ache, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a dangerous thing; and many times die those who have it, within eight days.
of the fork
The harness cannot dislocate from within the side of the ribs and the hip, and it is dislocated no times outside, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place with the form of your palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it;
And the shoulder which is towards the rib cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates no times, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed;
And in the same way is brought back the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it is dislocated to the part of the back to the bottom; and the second is to the part of the breast; and perhaps dislocated to the upper part, which rarely happens;
and it is not dislocated behind for the shoulder, and not inside for the nerves; and many times dislocated down towards the back, especially to those who have little flesh, because with them it goes easily; to those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and swells the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary that you feel it, as long as you are certain; and then begin the cure.
And it is known dislocation when it is brought down towards the hip, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between their diversity manifest. And you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip touch the head of the shoulder, as if it were one bone; and the patient cannot bring back his hand to its place, nor move from any movement;
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly by touching it;
and this manner of dislocation is not otherwise to be brought back, when it is new, or if the child is ill.
And the manner is that the ministers raise the hand of the sick person upwards, then put their fingers below the armpit, and raise the joint with force upward to its place; and the minister raises the hand, and extends it upwards, then puts it below; so it will come back gently.
And if it does not come back as we have said in a few days afterwards, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister should bring a gently softening and soothing ointment, such as decoction of heather and fenugreek and melilot in water, and administer it.
Then the sick person should be laid on their back, and put under the armpit a piece of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot onto the wool, and lift the head of the shoulder gently, and pull the hand of the sick person;
and some other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; that shoulder returns all now, and if you see so, reset it according to this manner:
and that you make present one man who is bigger than the patient; and be straight towards the ribcage, and put his shoulder under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit up so that the patient hangs on the arm; and some other ministers pull the patient's hand down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, so they hold with him any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and is one long stick in earth, whose head be as one pistol, and not too big nor too thin; then let the patient be put below, but that he has cloths of wool above, and the patient is standing with his back to the staff; then let his hand be extended down on the other side, and the joint will return to its place immediately.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one splint of two arms long and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so as to enter through the hole below the armpit, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the staff cloths so that the staff does not hurt the patient, then put it below the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm up on the staff's long side, and tie the shoulder to the staff, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one step of a ladder wide, and let the hands be extended down, and let the body hang on the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, in whatever manner that it is, it behooves you to put under the strap a ball of wool even, then place the plaster of powdered mill, with incense and yolk saffron, on the whole shoulder and around, then strain it under the strap gently, and turn the linen on the plaster, and embrace the hand at its collar, and let the hands remain thus.
And it behooves him to move little, as long as the limb is strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then move more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come, or for another cause, then it behooves you to administer cauteries to three places, as it is set forth in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all these things, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation which is toward the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and there administer another place; and care until it be healed.
And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then make the patient take many baths, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and if it has been dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, and the dislocation is not restored, because one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the shoulder of the sick person with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. Because the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it thus as abscesses come to its aid, because if abscesses were to come to its aid, it would be grievous to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back completely at all, even when it is in the back; so it is worse than the other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
And the restoration is like this when it can be brought back that you extend his hand with your two hands; and his arms be spread, and the hands do move according to the knife around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and hold of the root of the palm the knife which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then that you have enveloped a double cloth long and wide;
and when the mirror sets the joint to its hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then puts the joint in place, until it returns.
and when it is in place, she puts on a dry plaster with the white of an egg, and strains it well, and bends the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leaves it for some days, then unties it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, she unties the bandage and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, she re-applies the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it like that for some days, until it is firmly set; then unties it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, she bathes and rubs it well, and presses it until it is soothed; or you put a fleece of fat wool on the joint, then leave it for .i. day and one night, then take it off, and let him enter a bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint moderately, then put the bandage back, and then enter the bath; and thus do it twice or three times, until it is healed; and if you see that it doesn't return, put on a piece of wet moss warmed with butter, and strain it above; so it will come back to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is easier than other joints. Nonetheless, it should be returned to its place immediately, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the place does not become inflamed or come to have a hot abscess.
And the resetting is that you put the diseased hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he puts it straight, so that he puts his palm upon the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in its place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a table to extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and he puts his hand upon that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is well.
If this is not the case, then apply a soothing plaster to the inflamed place, and leave it so without restarting.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, the joint remains twisted.
And it does no harm to the patient unless as long as his hand is numb and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut or the artery; if there is no other means but to extract by cautery according to the case, and perhaps there is nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put it on the splint that we have said, then strap it and leave it for 5 days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
At no time are the fingers of the hand dislocated to each side, at no time on the back of the palm or on the belly;
Therefore are the fingers, and push the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and lean it towards the part where it is disjointed;
and let it be for .ij. days, and then put it straight that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and untie it every day, and make it move, and tie it again tightly; and do this often, until it is tight,
and also do the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do the same, when it is dislocated from another place.
of dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or the neck is dislocated, or there are many dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the limbs jump or move without will, and cannot hold them, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one.
And many times the spine moves to four parts; the one that moves to the rear is called "gibbosity":
The cure for it is that you ward off if the gibbosity came from childhood; if there is no cure nor healing of the whole.
And the one that comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, ancient men said there are many ways of cure by grand words, or there is no great benefit in all.
But I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
I say that in the inflammation that comes to the breast before, there is nothing but pain.
And also that which comes directly in two ribs, and one can cure only properly the one that comes to the back, as I said.
And that the patient is stretched on his face in one equal place, and has a strain under him so that he does not move.
Then place one brand in the center on the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a linen strip under the armpits of the patient, and another one at the hips, and knees, and ankles.
and the minister knows the ties, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the 2 thins.
and be well fastened, the tie as we have said, and the mire puts his palms on the spine formed, until it returns.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of 3 arms long, and place it under the part, and the patient be on his side, and push the head of the board under the part, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and put the mire his feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, then do it to the turning that turns by hand.
And it is that you place two sticks on the head of the patient's arm one large, and towards the feet two others, and have between each stick, inside and out, a palm's breadth of length.
and have in each stick one hole where the turn comes out, and let the sticks be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each two sticks have one turning stick, on which the linen turns, and have in two turnings two small sticks of a palm's length, to turn the turn.
and then tie the linen which is among the armpits to the turn towards the head, and the other linen towards the feet to the other turn, and each of the ministers turns his turn on all the linen, and the master puts the spine straight as we have said.
And when it is evened out, place a drying plaster with an abundance of egg on top, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of three inches long, which protrudes the level of the gibbosity and the part of the healthy spine, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
And if anything comes in the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of wood,
And sometimes the appearance comes in the back spine of the back, and one thinks that it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, for which one should not have presumption; by adventure would come death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only come out as dislocations, not like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated in .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and little dislocated front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the knee of the sick person than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend his knee at all. And it is the place that is below swollen with a hot abscess, because for that reason the head of the hip comes here.
And the sign of him to whom it comes to fire, so is this accident contrary to these before.
And the sign of him to whom it comes to the front, so is that he is well his leg according to the fulfillment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and holds back his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes above the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it comes behind, so is that he cannot expand his knee, nor double, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the groin is softened, and is the head of the hip at the place below the ribs.
The return of this kind of dislocation is that you should consider if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its arrangement, so there is no cure; and it does not behoove him at all that he has presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are .iiij. manners of dislocation, so hurry that you return the joint, and the extension inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; perhaps it will return, and there is no need for other care.
And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you prepare .i. strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with .ii. hands, or with .i. linen that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then he tightens him with a linen sigh on the hip; and another holds the chief of the linen;
and extend upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the earth at once, and remains.
This manner of extension is common to four similar things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, it is necessary to take care with its likeness. When the dislocation is at the side, it is necessary that you support the patient on his healthy hip, then put the bandage above the root of the hip, and the place which is below the angle, then extend the bandage upwards towards the angle, and towards the force;
then pinch some other ministers their arms, and embrace the large area of the injured hip, and extend it outwards in form: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong band over the two heels and on the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let it be suspended by the head of a pole, and be two arm lengths above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the top of the hip, and let another ministers hold with the patient, who embraces firmly the hip, because the jointure now returns easily.
And when the dislocation is at the rear, let the patient lie down, as we have said in the one who has gibbosity, and straiten one bandage on the affected leg properly, and on the foot too.
Then put 2 splints, one at the head and one at the foot, then place a splint between the hips of the patient to form the shape. And have a plant of wet cloths around him so that the patient does not bleed, then extend each minister towards him, and he puts each equal to his hand on the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, put him on one table and press him as we have said in the chapter on bone setting, and lie the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put the minister's pain on the sick ankle, then press with the other hand, and bring it down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward, nor raise up the ground, but it is necessary that he be as if the hip had been dislocated at the back, as we have said in the treatment of childbirth on the two hips; And be upon his face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table;
And it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the thighs, and put the splint, and a bandage of binding, so that the hip does not move;
And rest for three or four days, then unbind it, and put the splint on top; and if you see that they are even, bind it as before, and leave it for three days; then unbind it, and let him walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if he cannot bend it to his hip, you know that it is dislocated;
and the restoration of all of them is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet;
then take his knee in your palms, and pull it between your two hands, then bend the two bones that form the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will feel his leg to his hip lightly.
and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest against the hip, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then untie it; and do not let the patient work to walk, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not set straight, administer strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels is sometimes dislocated, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of it are that the ankle is swollen, and tender before the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction (of the dislocation) is light, and one must extend it gently with his hands when it is dislocated only.
And when it is dislocated completely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him by one leg above the ankle.
Then treat the foot with your right hand, and then with your left two times, then the one above, and push the foot upwards nicely.
And do this two times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, for it will return.
And if it cannot return like this, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert one stake firmly into the ground between his hips, and tie drapes around it so that the patient does not feel cold.
Then have the ministers hold the thigh, and other ministers stretch out the leg to their hands or to one limb, that they tie above the ankle. Then have each minister extend evenly, and the straps be placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they are being stretched.
Then put the mirrors equally on the dislocation to their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg at the groin, and the dislocation will return willingly.
And when it is at point, then put the plaster and bandages on top, and strain them firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the bindings be not too tight.
then let him leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments soften, then strain him; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for four days. and if he goes before that term, it is not certain that he does not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes from there, then it is necessary that you appease it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is necessary to gently extend them without effort, and it is an easy thing.
And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back or the foot, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a plain surface or on a table straight, and put your foot upon what protrudes from those joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it comes back;
And when it is aligned, and there is nothing protruding, then put under the sole of the foot a table with two boards, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he is healed.
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is desired to restore it, many times the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and not hasty, nor bold.
And use at the beginning of things soothing to an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. And when you see hope in it, then reset the limb now, so that the abscess chaws may come.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and treat the wound as it is fitting, with dried ointments;
and if with the dislocation comes a fracture, and small bones are broken, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple ailments;
and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arms and your body. Amen
