O you, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end by its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
And for that reason the work of hands is fortified in our region and is strange throughout all things, so is the science perished and cut off, and nothing remains of its strength except the small descriptions in books of the ancients which the hands have moved. And from this has come the error and the vanity, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the science.
Or it seems to me that I will make it come alive together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as much as is necessary.
And for the reason of those that no good masters of hands are found in our times, is the art of medicine lengthened. And it is necessary for him who intervenes in it to mount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and the conjunctions and the separations of vessels, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of arteries, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and their place of issue.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that what is good with the name is bad, and with the deed it is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, should beware so they do not fall into error and harm people; just as I have seen many more of those who meddle in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense of experience.
Because I saw a fool who cut, that is to say, an abscess of scrofula or a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck; for which reason so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's body, and the stone was large; so he took it out with a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the disposition of the patient and the size of the stone, and well if one cut it he would die.
And I saw another mire who took care of .i. duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had a wound; and the ignorant mirs strained the fracture over the wound as stars by very tight ligature, and did not leave any xalain on the wound, and left him thus; and he commanded that he should not untie it; and remained so that the leg was all swollen and the foot and came to perdition.
I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to untie the leg; and when I loosened it so it was at peace and felt no pain.
But every way the corruption was already confirmed or member, and he could not heal it; and did not cease the corruption to go through the member as long as the members were totally lost.
And see i. another wound which would burst i. abscess and then inflamed by the malice of its lord.
Because a sore, when it is pure of melancholic humor, does not need one to touch it with iron if it's not in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
And for this, my dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: that is to say, one where there is peril in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
For which reason it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that the foolish people may not speak badly of you.
If you take your weapons in caution, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the fearsome diseases to grieve health; and remove your weapons from those who make you doubt, and have done in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galen says in some of his admonitions: “Do not take care of bad illnesses, lest you be called a foolish person.”
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and of medicinal cauteries, and this chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the shapes of the instruments, and of the cautery irons, and of all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is of cutting and piercing, and of cupping and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
The third chapter is of restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and of the shapes of the instruments.
Thus as we remember from the work, it behooves me to say the quality of help and of the annoyance of each complexion.
I say that the qualities of help and of annoyance are the longest speech and most subtle science and the secret answers; and of this many wise men speak and agree to this; and I suffice myself with their words, for I fear length.
I say that cauterization helps universally to every complexion where it has matter, except for .ij. complexions: that is to say, hot complexion without matter, and dry complexion without matter.
In hot and dry complexion combined matter, some say that cauterization is great help; and others say the contrary: that cauterization is not good for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be cured of a hot malady by heat, nor by dryness; and he who says the contrary states that cauterization does great help to a hot and dry malady that comes in the bodies of men. For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it many times by experiment.
And in every way, do not intervene except he who has proven it, and who knows by long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the events and spacing of times; we have no more fear of other complexions, even in cold and moist diseases. And all the mirrors assembled and agreed to the cautery.
And know, sons, that a cautery assembled fire is of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than a cautery of burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and it does not come forth except to the member that is burned, and it does not harm another member at all.
The hot medicines come from one member to another when they spread, and bring diseases of great harm to the member; and by chance kill the patient.
The fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, unless there is superfluity.
And this I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I lose the secret which is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels illnesses from the body, as the philosopher says when he demonstrates; now receive it in your thoughts.
And know, son, that it is agreed upon in what time cauteries should be made, and by whom they are to be applied.
And I say that cautery is advisable at all times, because the harms occurring are lessened with the help of cautery; and also if the cautery is for necessary pains before and until they cannot wait for the time when greater evil will come to the limb.
And do not ever think as fools do; because the sickness that is cured by cautery has no return; and they say thus; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not merely medicine that alters complexion, and dries up the humors which are cause of pain, but it is better than medicine for the hastiness of its effect, and for the virtue of its work and dominion.
And a certain thing is that the sickness comes at times according to the complexion of the sick person and the place of the illness and its virtue; and they are assembled in him superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as for example cauteries of lead for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cautery is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cautery is worth after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cautery is the last of medicine because when we administer ways of cures in any disease and they are not worth, then we administer the cautery, and it is worth. Therefore it appears clearly that cautery is the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that cautery of gold instrument is more effective than of iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the leus of cautery does not cause decay, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that it is true in some men; and cautery of gold is worth more than iron, as they say.
And all the way when you heat a tool of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it cools down so quickly; and if one heats it too much; they do it to the fire; and so there is enough impediment.
And for this we use our fire cautery that we have made apparent in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter of the head just to the feet, for that the way may be lighter to find.
Of the olive cautery
This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the brain, and there are two kinds made because of a sickness called “soda,” and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for multitude of dreams and toothache and sore throat, and also for all maladies that come from cold like paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a medicine solution, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtue and the age and the custom of the patient can endure; and then raise the head of the patient.
And then make him sit crosswise between your hands, and put his hands on your thighs; after, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two mediums come, if it bleeds then exhaust the cautery that is called “olivare,” because this is the form:
And put it on the place marked with ink, and do in descending and pulling your hand up and down turning; then gently lift your hand, and look at the place if you see the bone that is, to say a small one; and if you do not see it, so begin again the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; after take one peck of silk, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the place, and leave it for three days; after put on soft cloth in butter; and let it stay until the burn is removed; after cure the wound of the ointment which is called “tetrafarmaçon”, until it is healed.
And they said the ancients, that when more time the wound remains open, more it purges; and for that reason so they aid moves.
And they said any of these that one must leave the cautery so much that part of the bone be burned, and then reset what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
And they say the other one must leave the cautery thus long, and thrust it so hard that one lowers the bone as wide as a spindle that women put in their spindles for which the humors are carried out; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after that one must clean and dress.
And these two ways of cauteries do not seem to me to be good at all, except in some men where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the shoulder is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and even when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first semblance of cautery is more saving and quicker for me, and of this use I work in such a way together with safety.
of the old pain of the head
When throughout the head comes chronic pain and lasts for a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills that are called "cochie," and of cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does to him the cautery that we have said before, and it is not worth.
Take ward if the shoulder of the sick is of a strong nature, and that it be not too cold; therefore cauterize below that cautery one point as we have said above.
After make cautery on each horn of the shoulder up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and there is one in which one puts ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the sick feels much more great pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauteries of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the shoulder, and this is the form:
Of the cautery of the head When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and it spreads to the eye, and the patient is purged with medicines cooling, and one has done all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then I make cauteries according to .ij. manners, that is to say of medicine hot and of fire.
The cauteries of hot medicine are such that you take a slice of garlic, and remove the skin and cut it  one piece as two fingers, and then put it on the temple where the pain holds in such a manner that you can place the slice of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed there, tie it and hold it well and leave it so for twelve hours; and then untie it and scrape away the garlic slice, and leave the wound so for two or three days; then put on top cotton dipped in butter as long as it covers it.
After the ointment cure as long as it is healed; and if you see this done of some burning medicines that I have written or do in the tenth treatise of burning medicines.
The iron cautery is thus according to this manner. Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a nail, having i. one point of curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and tremble the fire lightly, until half the thickness of the heart be burned; and raise your hand that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and there runs an abundance of blood.
After put cotton in awe of silk, and put on the spot for three days; then put cotton moistened with butter, and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at all its point, and keep from covering the artery in this migraine which is not yet ancient.
of migraine
When you cure migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn’t profit, and you see that the cauteries before said of medicine and of iron don't help him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it be white; and then rule so on the place desired a line of half a finger long, and withdraw your hand once, and strain that you not cut the artery and that you do not come up to the bone; and guard the jaw that it stays quiet when one moves it, and the nerve doesn't feel but that it is quiet and that spasm does not come to the patient, and guard against dripping of blood from the artery when it will be cut, or cutting has great fear and even more so to him who does not know it, and who isn’t studying and experienced; and leave the work in mid-way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you in this book where it happens.
And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has 2 blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
Of the pain of the ears from cold
When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has opened medicines solutives and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then take this cautery which is called "poins", of which this is the form:
After point all around the ear of the sick one, or around the two if the pain holds in both, and you distance a bit above the root of the ear after that you have marked the place to burn; and have ten poins around each ear; after cure the place until it is healed.
Of the torture of the mouth
Torment which must be cured by cautery is not far from those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of illness; and do not make cautery to the appearances that come from dryness and sprain of nerves.
When you cure this semblance of torment that moves from phlegm of eyes and expulsions of head and gargles, and these are not worth it, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and the other a little fire on the temple, and the third in the adjustment of the two lips; and put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make cautery to the top of the ear above a bit below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as one finger's breadth; and leave the cautery so long as half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
And it is the semblance of the cutter that we have put in front, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit bigger; after curing its place as I have said before, until it is healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then I make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 where it is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
of lethargy
For this illness it is necessary to give the patient large doses and pills that stimulate the brain; afterwards re-rub the head of the patient well, and place on the nape of his neck a plaster of mustard as it is written in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
If he is healthy thus, good is it; and if he is not, then to him do three cautery make of the middle of his head descending until the neck, and have a space between each cautery two of broad; and cure it as the others, and if thou see him join, and the patient is suffering, then to him do one cautery in the midst; and if needs be, two others upon the two horns, and cure it until it be healthy; and let the cauteries which are called 'olivare', as I have said before.
from cold of the head It befits that the head be purified of herbs and of those which we have said before; after this anoint the head of the patient, then make cautery in the middle of the head and upon each horn, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if thou hast more need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far advanced, then to him make four cauteries upon the spine of the back; and let him remain until the most of the heart be burned, and gently lift your hand; after this cure it until it be healthy, and let the cauteries which are called 'olivare' as we have said before.
of the epilepsy
The epileptics should not use a fiery cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with herbs and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffers from severe medicine.
And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make gargles and chewing modifying the brain often with well-cooked meats; after, place the hair on the head in the middle, and make 1 cautery according to what we have said before, and 1 cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is weak and suffering, make cauteries like I said to the one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make 1 subtle cautery according to this manner:
When by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities or the humidities corrupted and phlegm gross, then the cautery of those cauteries as we have said to him who has paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy are the superfluities declining to melancholy, and is the body of the sick moist, then he gives to drink something by which the brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
After raise the head of the sick man; after make one torteil of flax well made, as well as one circle, so he put it in between the head; and the sick man sits crossed, and be held well on all sides; after present the liniment, and is worth mews of ram's butter ancient; and the heat to fire temperately, so that the two if he puts him the can suffer; after empty the circle by within the head, and let it cool; and make this to the sick man each week once with another good government, until he be healthy.
Or if you see the one cauterized, do it by making many more pokes all over the cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain increasingly; and then put on a cotton moistened in butter and grease of swine fat.
of the awe of the eyes When awe comes first to the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then commence and give to the patient something purifying the head, and warding off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more times fasting.
After [you command him] to raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the head, and make 2 cauteries on the 2 temples if the descent of the awe is to the 2 eyes together, or on one if the descent is in one; and cut with all the cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and ward off decorrement of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, so restrain it as well as you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision the cautery how you will stop it; and sometimes one makes cautery or a heater under the two bones behind.
of the sides of tears
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of this awe descending to the eyes: 1 cautery removes the chief, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries or heaters under the 2 bones; and if there is need for more, one cauterizes sagely above the eyebrow with each small cautery.
of the sides of tears from within the eyes
When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then give the patient three nutshells to drink; after which, touch his head, and make a cautery in the middle or with olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the two sides, one under the cheekbones; and guard the artery so that you do not cover it. And this is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olivare". This is the form:
And if you see so make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are; and do not let go of the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
hair that pricks the eye Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted to the parchment, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries according to two manners: that is to say, of fire, or of burning medicine.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and are even, then place the patient in your good health; after mark on the paper of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let it be the beginning of the sign next to the hairs; then put cotton moistened in egg white and  muscillage of parsley on the eye, then heat up the cautery of which this is the form:
After cauterize on the figure that you have signed point and point many times, that the skin be burned in that place; and the signs of the healthiness of the work is that you see the paper retreated, and the hairs raised to the height of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave so for .iij. days, then put cotton moistened in butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
And if after those the hairs come, and the paper is softened then begin again the cautery on that same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are few, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and be even, and do not prick the hairs the eye.
The cauteries of burning medicine are that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live coals, of each one 1/3, and grind them together well; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the form that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put it on the eyes of the paper; and if the patient holds in 1 eye only, so must one operate in 1, and if in both as well; and put under the eye cotton moistened in egg wine; and the head of the patient be in your healthy and put your hand showing above the medicine, and press 1 peck and the muzzle every time that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for he feels it as much as fire. When you have done this for a long time, so remove the medicine with your hand. And when the biting has passed, so lift the eyelid, and examine if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is well. If this is not the case, so put back some medicine on the place where the medicine did not operate, until your works are equal, and your eyes set; then put cotton moistened in butter until the burned skin is healed, after cure the place of the ointment which is called 'diaphanis' and another, until it be sound.
And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that it does not fall from the medicine into the eyes.
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and in smallness, and according to these be your constraints; and let not be returned the right way to him whose is the study of this art.
Of the cure of fistula by cautery
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not helpful, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to it according to this manner.
Instruct the patient to put his head on your healthy hand; and hold the head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he move his head; after putting moistened cotton in an egg white or in parsley juice on the eye; after heating the cautery which is as: and place it on the head as the shape of a goose feather, along with which the cautery should be; if you see, so pointed from one end to the other, and if you see, also as a tent; but all the same, this which is placed is valuable for your work.
After press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the corruption, and dry it; and if it is closed, so operate, and drain out the bowel; after put on the hot cautery form, and hold your hand to the cautery to the part of the nose above the eye, that your hands do not make folly; and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and the corruption.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, recommence the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and let it for 3 days; after which put on cotton moistened in butter, and cure with ointment drying until it is healed, and if 40 days pass and it is not healed, put on medicine corrosive aqua until the bone is uncovered; and the king according to what it would come in his chapter.
And there is a way of cautery of fistula that none of the ancients said. Attend to fistula, and open its place; after put in the opening 1 camel's hair fine of which this is the form: And it is made to the quantity of 3 of a plum; and hold your hand or camel's hair firmly, and let the patient not move at all, that the melted lead does not run to his eye; and it is necessary that one puts on the eye of the patient cotton moistened in wine of figs or in honey: the lead so art the place of fistula, and the healthy by miraculous health.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer perfuse to the nose and bring the fistula back to the body of the nose according to what is appropriate in its proper place.
cracks in lips Many times occur cracks in the lips that are called "hair," and also on the lips of children.
When you cure these cracks as we have said in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then cauterize i. small scalpel cautery according to this form:
And put it carefully into those crevices until it comes to the end; after which care the place with cerote until it is healed.
of the abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the uvula, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has made rot and swelling and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit; therefore it is necessary that you have 1 cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after which you burn or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron heats at its end; and do this once or twice; after which care for what we have said in cures, until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if that does not happen, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in your book.
of the movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your hand; after sharpen the cautery whose form will come here afterwards in such a manner that you put a canine on the tooth; and put inside the cautery hot immediately, and hold as long as the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; after fill the sick person's mouth with salt water, and let it stay for an hour and spit out forcefully.
And in such a manner the tooth which was moving is thus confirmed, and the softened gum restrained, and the moisture corrupted dry.
Of the pain of teeth
When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or dampness, and the treatments of medicine are not worth, then there is need for cautery according to .ij. manners: and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter of wax, and the end in a spoon of iron or steel; after take cotton and envelop it on the point of a needle, and moisten it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and hold until it is cooled; and so do often as long as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see such moistened wool and cotton in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put on one hot iron as long as the heat comes to the end of the tooth.
The cauteries assembled fire is such that you take a piece of iron or steel, and be thick so that the heat does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, of which its shape will come here after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it behoves that the patient fills his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then roots it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrofulous ulcers are of cold phlegm and moisture, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then cauterize with the heated iron described below which comes after, and has two openings for the fumes to issue from the one side of the cautery; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it so for three days; and put over cotton moistened in butter as long as the burn is removed; after cure the place with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
When the humors prevail upon the channels of the throat, and also when this comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be first purged by resolving medicines; afterward make cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and do not burn more than an inch deep. Afterward make one other cautery at the junction of the neck with the head of the spine, and let it be the cauterizing iron which is called "clavile" as we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
of the thrust When all and sickness of the body are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dry skin, and the illness is ancient, if you make two cautery wounds on the shoulder in their places; and one other cautery wound between the two breasts; and be the cautery which is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
And if you see it (the patient), make cautery in pricking at the whole cautery which is called "poins" because of that form is before in the illness of the ears; and be the points up to thirty, or as much as needed. After cure the place according to what is said before, and be the cauteries at three points according to this form:
And for that reason these are the cauteries lighter, because you make them in three parts.
of the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After that, be so kind to the patient on his back and on his rib cage; after lift the heart which is inside the tittle to the sides of your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then cauterize with .ij. ners  of which this is the form:
And cauterize the heart until it pierces to the rib cage, and comes out the figure of the cautery altogether .iiij. cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery which has .iij. ners, because the figure of cauterization are sis cauteries; and they are the nerves according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has .iij. ners:
And sometimes it is adjusted on this, namely the nerve for which there are 8 cauteries.
After put on the cautery porous ground with a seal; after make rest the patient, and let not the members be moved for long time until he is well fortified.
And if it is dislocated upwards, which thing happens rarely, then make cautery on the thick of the cauterization clavicle, or many cauteries in pricking. Because the joint is closed, and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
of cautery of pleurisy
The ancients said that one must do to pleuresin cauteries of roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the biggest that you will be able to find, and whether it is dry, and also as thick and as long as your fingers; and the moisten in oil, and the press on the fire, and cauterize one cautery between the forcele and the neck, and two small cauteries a little down in the part that is below the beard; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, in declining behind a little; and one cautery under the breastbone, and one other on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two as the two ribs of the breast from the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make openly as if smelling.
And they said any ancient that no man uses cautery of fire resembling one razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs, until it comes to this abscess; and out jump pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
of the mouse
When you cure the disease of the mouse of what we have said in the divisions of the treatments, and it does not help, then there are three kinds of cauteries that are all good.
Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauteries, in length according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not hasten your hand to the whole cautery, and let the patient be lying on his back;
And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two points, as we have shown it in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keel which is on the mouse, or the cuts of the patient come from the left, and let the elevation by which you lift the keel be according to the keel, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries be according to the width of the body.
After he sets the two burned embers so that the skin is pierced on the other side, and then pulls out the cautery and thus there will be four. And if you see it, then cauterize the whole cautery with three embers. After the cure when it has gotten rot for a long time, and this is worth more than the other cures before mentioned.
of dropsy
Cauterization is not good for dropsy, except for the method called “asclytes.” When you cure it according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly button, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place on the hip; and let the cauteries be near the edge of the skin.
After let the cautery uncovered for to fight putrefaction long time, and do not leave the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and will be together the two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the belly is the clavicle that we have before shows; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is set forth above.
of the swelling of the feet When the feet are swollen in the one who is hydrophic, and are full of  yellowish water, it behooves you to cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deep into their part, thus shall go out the yellowish water, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After do on .ij. legs .ij. cauteries in each leg at the tip of the curette; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries open lengthwise without curing, that they may rise in them; after the cure of the other cures that we have said.
of the house
When belly solution comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which is in the stomach and in the intestine is weakened, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering much and of great virtue, then do one large cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cautery of the stomach, to the circulating cautery; and four cauteries around the navel subtle, at each cautery a subtle cleaver, and two cauteries on the hips.
And if you see the humors abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the groin, and one cautery on each side, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
Of the cure of hemorrhoids
When the hemorrhoids are in their foundation, or one or more, and they are old and are of large humors cold and moist corrupted, and are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit at all, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all outside below the scapula point to point in a triangle, and one cautery below the buttock two fingers.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the face one makes i. great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and one other on the liver, and one other on the mice to all the cautery clavile; and leave the cautery open long time. After cure the place as long as it is healed.
of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
When you cut the "thelul," sharpen the cautery which seems like i. razor, and then put it all ablaze on that "thelul"  cut; and let it there as long as the cauteries reach the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not clot; do this once or twice, and if there is much "thelul," cauterize each one as we have said; after the cure of ointments beneficial until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the "alchatim," it will have more help.
of poorly treated wound
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will relate in its place, such a malady comes that it can only be cured by cautery.
When a fistula comes to any [place], and is filled with corruption and putrid moisture, then take a subtle probe, and carefully know how far the probe has entered. Then heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that the probe entered, and continue the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice, or thrice, according to the quantity of need; and beware of burning the nerves which are inside, and the large veins. If the fistula goes toward the bladder and intestines, then beware of those places, and do not perform this outside [of] fleshy areas, and think that it is not passed through; after healing the place until it is sound, and if the place is healed and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the place is troubled, and the bones at the root are corrupted; and in this way like those which we will say in its place.
of the kidney disease When pain from cold comes as rains, and of great windiness, and does not take much of a woman, then it is necessary that you make cautery on the loins on one side and the other with the cautery clavicle that we have said before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will do more help.
of the bladder When the bladder is weak and feeble from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then I make cautery in the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery as long as our finger; and I make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauteries be clavicle according to the form said before.
of the marrow When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for those to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends are late; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that one make three cauteries around the bud, as we have said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back; and let the cauteries be clavil, as we have said.
of the hip
When the viscous moistures descend to the bone of the hip, and for this cause it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when one measures them together; and it is found the level of the viscus department, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the bone of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place around the bone as it turns, so that the bone be inside the circle; and let the cautery be such as the one with which the stomach was cauterized.
And if this cautery is not present to you, make .iij. cauteries of the olive large, and let the cauteries be as deep as all the others; and cure it until it is sound.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the socket of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of those things that we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good-smelling pills.
After that you make cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: namely, both ardent medicines and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, some of which are such: that you cauterize on the socket of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make them with a good depth and width, and have between each cautery a space the size of a digit, and let the cauteries be olive; sometimes one makes cautery in the middle on the top of the hip, for which reason there are four according to this form:
And if you see it, cauterize it with the cautery of the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do in such a manner that the circle contains the whole hip, and all the spaces of the heart are burned.
And this is the manner in which it is done in sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach to the thigh nor the leg. And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then one makes .ii. cauteries there where the patient says that the pain holds him, and .i. cautery above the ankle 4 fingers, to the left side a little; and let the cauteries be pointed, and let the spaces of the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to 2 fingers of the foot or near it, then one cauterizes where he feels the pain .iij. points or .iiij. with the cautery which is called "points".
And if it is necessary, then one does more; and if he knows that the pain is below the knee toward the thigh, then one makes a cautery with the pointed or circular cautery; and well guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery there so much that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do no more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
And I myself have seen more than a few who had cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so that the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and it became pierced and corrupt throughout the foot. After a solution of belly from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and the other, according to this manner. // And the wise say in the cautery of the hip, for that reason here is the manner, make one such iron and be at the head as thick as a thumb nail, or a little less, and be between grooves and be from one groove to the other of spacing the quantity of a finger's knuckle; and let the grooves be toward two parts, and let them also be like knuckles, and there be one handle of iron well made; and this is the shape:
And be heated until it is all red and feel its heat, and then put it on the bone of the diseased hip, and be turned on the healthy side; and cauterize once one cautery return and leave it three days; and then make a plaster of butter, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the cure of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it; and nonetheless these are good cauteries, which can bear it, and where it is needed.
of the pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or by excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter spread, none of these appearances are worth cautery except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
It is necessary after this that the patient be void of fetid pills or other similar things, that on him be made upon his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed with inche, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make .iij. cauteries or .iiij. at the clavile cautery mean according to this form:
Many times this illness comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight belly when they cry, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
When you see this and want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this kind according to this form.
So that the cautery grazes each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, cauterize around the spine with the poignant cautery two or three lines, and let the points be near each other. After curing the place until it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not administer cautery in a cavity which is in a nerve spame.
of the pain of the joints
When pain in the joints is from moisture that are spread to each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, that which they call "gout" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cures of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you prick on the face of the foot, then make cautery to the whole cautery which one calls "point." And if the pains come as far as the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery on each knee three or four cauteries of each part, to all the olive-shaped cautery; and if you have need of more, then make more, but do not hold your hand there further than while the head of the fire is burning.
And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then administer the cautery that we have said in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains no pain at the elbows, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance for the sick person and ponder medicines. For if you make good governance for him and purge phlegm, then he will be healed with the help of God.
of the rupture of the shoulder
When a rupture comes in the arms, and the tendons descend to the elbows, it is newly, so when you see him cured, that he does not move it on that day; and that he uses things that hold up his belly, so that the fibers descend from his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the tendons are repaired, and straighten them towards your thumbs, and sign of a circle under the rupture on the bone of the shoulder, and with a whole sign that is similar to half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery of this which is the form:
until it is white and he feels the heat. Then straighten the tendons to their place; and the ministers hold his hand so that they do not return backwards; and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him one cushion and one sergeant on the thighs, and one other on the leg which holds his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with all your strength, and hold it straight and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again once more until you come to the bone; and be careful that the tendon does not protrude when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and so that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
And knows that when you do not come just to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries of children be subtle according to the measure of bones, and of big people also big according to their measure; after .iij. days cure their place with butter until the burning is removed; after the cure of other ointments until it is healed, and lies the patient .xl. days on his back until the wound is well joined; and it is necessary that his dressings be long, so that the boil does not come out when he tries to go into chambers.
And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, if it is administered a good splint, and wear it for another .xl. days; and have good rest, that he does not work much and beware of too much repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high braiding; and when he does this teaching, it is healed entirely. And I will say here after the cure of tailoring in its chapter. of the rupture of the belly
When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you make one cautery with the cautery according to its quantity, and after curing according to what we have said; and none of the ancients said that it should be cauterized with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
But first sign the place of the rupture and make a line through the width above the rupture, and another one outside, and keep your hand in all the cautery clamp. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
Of ancient pain in no limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from a fall or striking, and this pain lasts for a long time, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, it is well; if not, start again another cautery on top of that one, because it is customary that it must change in the member that is nearest to it, for which reason it is necessary that you do the cauteries as long as the patient is healed.
of surgery
The surgeons are aided at times by cautery with great help, and also for the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see them being cauterized, take note if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not increase or remain, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then do five cauteries on the head: one above the head, and the other towards the front near the end of the eyebrows; and two on the two horns, and one behind on the back. And let your hand stay so that the cautery comes right up to the bone, and so that the bark is pushed out so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the mice according to how it is before.
And if the mesentery is spread everywhere; and it manifests clearly, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and one cautery on its navel, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crupie and one other under, and two on the two shoulders; and two on the arms, and two on the tendons of the hip, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and guard against the nerves that are on the last calf, that you do not burn them; and sometimes it is done cauterizing on the bone of the arm, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
And know that when more cauteries are made, the more help is done, and the more it profits; and know that the patient feels no pain from the cautery as healthy people feel it, because the body is already completely corrupted. And it behooves the cauteries to be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in ways of irons. After cure the place with flour of wheat with honey and other cures until it is healed.
of swelling
When swelling comes in any limb and is treated by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then I make cauteries on the limb according to the size and the smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be one prick entering into the thickness of the flesh; then cure with ointment until it is healed. And sometimes one makes cautery on the hand and on the foot and on the back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus is removed the swelling; and nonetheless do not interfere any who is not knowledgeable of the limbs and of the exits of the nerves moving the body.
from girdles
When the malady that is called "albaras" is present, and the means of medicine avail nothing, then cauterize it with a cautery one prick through, according to the quantity of the thickness of the flesh, until the blemish is removed, and its color changed; then cure with flour of vicees and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of alondre, of each one part; and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
The cure of sores by cautery
When a sore begins and you wish to arrest it, cauterize it with the cautery which seems like .i. circle, all around the border of the sore.
of the swelling which cannot die
When anyone has a disease that is called "adubelati," and it tarries to die, or because of the superfluity that it makes, or because of the water of the sick person when he is decrepit (that is to say too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten its death: then cauterize it around with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierce with all the cautery, so heat the cautery of which this is the form:
And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" as long as the cautery pierces the core, and be such the cautery that the patient feels it from outside in such a manner that the course of the rot is alleviated. After the cure as long as it is perfectly healthy.
The cure by fire with iron
Another manner of disease there is which is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else than a consumption of the limb, because it consumes the limbs as fire does the dry vines. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer cauterization with fire, then sharpen the iron cautery quite small and large, according to what is fitting for the place where the disease is; after, cauterize all around until you eradicate all corruption, and nothing of it remains, that all that which is corrupt be removed. And then leave it for 3 days, and put on the cauterized places softened broil with oil as long as the scabs of fire are removed, and all the corruption. After the cure of suppuration generating flesh.  And if you see after 3 days that healthy flesh does not rise, it is good; and if this one, then begin the cautery again on what remains of the corrupt places. And this consumption has been cured at times with ague medicine in place of fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure of ague medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
of the  sprouts which come to the foot
Many times it happens that to the foot by fire there is born a malady which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large thing feared which bleaches the foot. And the cautery of this malady si is in .ij. manners. That is to say cautery of fire, and cautery of hot water. The cautery of fire si is that you heat one cautery like as it is a penne of vulture, and be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it have subtle margins; after put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it so for .iij. days until it begins to get rotten; then make an ointment of wild mallows ground with oil, and leave the ointment upon all night, and the nails will fall and will be uprooted from its roots. Then cure the place with ointment, inciting flesh until it is healed.
And if they are converted by fire the body, and many times happen and in hands and in feet, si it is necessary that you bring them cautery of hot water; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or of fer, or a penne of vulture, and put upon the nail and the althelul, that is to say sprouts warts; and put the cane above so that it penetrates all around, then I put a pot of hot water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning so that the margin of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water way deep until the root; and suffer the patient a little the biting of the hot water an hour; then leave it so, and it will be uprooted all at all its roots. Thus make one after another, as long as you eradicate all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments which inciting flesh.
the cure of trembling
When some tremble from cold or fever quartan or other, so it befits that you make to him .iv. cauteries or .iii. on the spine of the back, .i. cautery between each spine; and .i. cautery or weight, and .i. on the stomach at the olive cautery; so will leave the trembling, and hastens the saint health from the cold sickness.
of festering pustules
Sometimes appear by fire on the body baths, or festering pustules, that come from large corrupt matters. So it befits at first when they appear that one makes cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle twig, so that its point is seized with fire, or from root of long arisologe, or to the lentil cautery. And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they may not grow in them afterward, but are broken the superfluities whence they come, and are healed; but it befits that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
when the artery is cut Many times there are great spurts of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stop.
And nonetheless when this happens to anyone, quickly put your finger on the wound of the vein, and restrain it very tightly until the bleeding is appeased under your finger, and no drop comes out anymore; then put to fire the olive cauteries more small and large as much as they are all red; then take one, or a great one or a small one according to the wound and its place where the artery is routed, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is restrained.
And if it leaps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then take hastily one other of the cauteries that are on fire.
And do not cease to do these one after the other until the vein is stretched; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is beside it, and that another malice does not come upon the patient; and know that when a vein departs from the artery, one cannot well stretch it, even when the artery is great, unless by one of the four manners that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding of thread, or by medicines put upon it which have power to stretch veins; and be bound and restrained well.
Who will bring a stretching of ligaments tightly by straps or by putting things burning on it, or other similar things, if it does not profit to this?
And if this happens to anyone and he has no medicine present, then he should put his right index finger upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it well until it is stretched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but often wet with cold water so that it be very cold until the vein is congealed and thickened and stretched; and make from then on those things which he needs of cauteries and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all the maladies in which it is necessary cautery of fire, or ardent medicine, and the incisions and causes and instruments and forms of cauteries; and I have put that chapter from the head jus to the foot, and I will go in this chapter by that same way for those who find it more easily what they want.
And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear pupil, that you learn that in this chapter there is more peril and fear than in the first of cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary more great caution.
For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you do not undertake folly. Because many kinds of people come to cures. Some come with such illnesses that they die easily because of the frenzy that they find in their illness, and because of the greatness of their wickedness; and of these one must have fear. And of these there are those who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am cured"; and the illness is deceitful. It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more care in your honor than in your greed, and do not open foolishly but wisely of those whom you are certain about, and whom you can have taken and praise; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and memory of length.
Very dear son, May our Lords give you good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to be inspired by the holy inspiration of his hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to you in devising by chapters, according to those that it is before or chapter of cauteries, which I have devised from the chief to foot, for those that you find more easily those that you will need.
The chief full of water
Know that this illness comes many times to children at birth, and when the midwife strains too hard the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from a reason unknown
And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and to all those that I have seen it has hastened death; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better for me to leave the work in such cures.
And I saw one child whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger each day until he could not support it; and he thought so much because of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled under the bone on the scapula, between the heart and the bone; and the work is like this if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you split in the middle of the head a wide fissure; and be also long as two fingers, as much as the moisture flows; and see here the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is more thick, and the abscess is larger, do two incisions in the manner of a cross, according to this shape:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs that you see the commissures of the shoulder open on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inward, and this does not return to you: then it behooves you to split in the middle of the head three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision extract the moisture all out. After extract the incisions of cloths and powders, and put wine and oil there, and let so until the fifth day; then untie it, and cure the wound by tents and by ointments, and leave to be restrained the chief bandage, and then feed the patient dry meat of lack of moisture as long as the limb be strengthened and healthy.
And another way of incision is that you look where opens the greatness of the abscess, and its assembly of water; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Then cut where the abscess opens, and its filling of water, and  cut it according to what you have power; and guard that you do not cut the artery; and vein blood flows, so that the patient dies from the decrease of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
of summary
When it happens to anyone a sickness that is called “catarrh” at the eyes or at the chest, and the patient is old, and the cure of medicine does not profit, then the last cure is the cautery with those one covers the 2 arteries.
It then behooves you, when you see them to cover, that the patient make back his head; after he rubs their place with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then binds the patient's neck with one cloth; then look where the vein beats, and their positions of the one and the other are after the ears, and so are placed; then sign their locations with ink, then cover both with a sharp spatula of 2 parts. as far as the flesh comes to the bone, and this is by the broad side of the head.
And if you see, plunge the spatula under the artery and cover it above, cutting also as 2 fingers across.
And when the vein is cut, blood jumps out continuously from above.
And if the artery does not open to the touch, then you must measure the quantity of space of three digits, then sign it and make it up to the bone; and that which is needed to put out the blood is six c., and perhaps a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone without any sheath, then cut it so that no abscess comes, then restrain the wound and bind it, and the care of ointment until it is healed.
Of migraine
When a chronic migraine comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and the old soreness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medicine and all that does not help him, then restrain the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
And the manner of their extraction is that the patient makes rear the hairs of his temples, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is poorly returned outwards than in some men who are too cold; and if it is returned, it strains the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rubs the place with some rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
then scrape the skin lightly until you come to the artery, then trace it upwards as much as possible with pincers, and depart well from the nets that are beneath on each side; and if the artery is thin, turn it back at the point of the needle, then cut that part according to the quantity of two chias. For if it is not cut, it does not jump out completely in every way.
And draw out blood from the six to three; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it in two leagues of a strong double silk thread, so that rotting does not come before the soldering of the wound, and there comes bleeding; then cut the superfluity which is between the two liens in the same hour, and then, if you see fit, you cauterize it with a cuticular cautery until the bones are reached as long as the chias are cut; and this is the middle work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
For the cautery is an aid to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help to moistures. Where it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fill their place with old cotton and put on them tents well made; and when they are undone, let there be care with dry medicines which make flesh grow, and with tents, until it is healed; and if without a stop of the artery as much as you work on it, then hasten to cover by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriol and restrain it to your hand that the bleeding cease; and if you lack these present things, put on the place your cloth until the bleeding is congealed, and raise the place of cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be restrained as it should be; and what is better and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this cautery trenchant by .ij. parts, but let the trenches be well spaced to keep longer their heat. For when the instrument is too thick, it holds less its heat. And must have between the two knives one and a half inches wide, and then when you have marked with the two points, and you put the red hot iron above as long as it comes up to the bone, and cut the vein in two points; and be distanced between the two shoulders because it is not joined together by this cautery at all; and this is the form of the cautery:
tears
When the tears from the eyes are descending through the veins that are on the test of the head of fury, and it does not benefit any medicine if it is done, and you see the face of the patient twisting, and feels or front walking as if from shivering; and where the oil is wet and so much that the hair of the papers falls out, and the papers are chapped, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
And they call it the old "contused cure," and you make to the patient who has this malady the hairs that he has or front, then he makes iii incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as ii should be all over the forehead down until the neck, and the other ii. in ii. ribs above the cheekbones; and guard yourself from the incision of the arteries that are the two ribs above the cheekbones; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and let each wound be the quantity of iii. thumbs across joined;
from the incision which is below the temple until the second incision; and scrape all the skin which is between the two incisions to all the fat that is on the bone, then make another from the middle incision until the other second, and then extract far this spatula.
If you put it in the first fissure the instrument which is called "cultellaire," and is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its shape: And put the sharp edge toward the flesh near the heart, and the blunt edge towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the middle fissure. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to where it opens into the heart, and then on the other side make another incision in the middle fissure up to the other end; and then extract the blood equally, and press the place for the blood drawn; then put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and put on cloths soaked in wine and oil and balsam, and keep that an abscess does not come there; and on the third day untie the bandage, and then administer great amounts of warm water, then the cure of basil ointment with rose oil, and other cures for which one heals wounds, until it is healed.
of the eyes
When to any come catarrh acute accustomed, and you see the eyes closed and small, and weakening of sight, and the papers burned; and the hair falls out, and where chief in perform a sharp pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the mother cure that is, this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a great cut between the eyebrows, and another of width. And begin from the fissure of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at the meal; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then apply between the two lips of the fissure cotton old, and linen bandage; then bind above cloths softened in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, that make cartilage.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster from them; and administer it in these wounds to prevent cartilage growth entirely.
Of stopping up ears
All that which falls into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, as lentils, beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and oil and similar things.
When something falls into the ear, like a stone or any other manner of thing that does not join with the ear nor grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, instill a drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and have him sneeze by means of condiments, and stop his nostrils when sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and keep the ear upwards. Many times it comes out through this cure; and if it does not come out, administer extraction with very fine tweezers, which is the form:
If it comes out with the tweezers, it is good; if not, administer extraction with a fine single-edged needle; and if it does not come out by this, make a bird's beak of iron and thrust the head of the beak or hole into the ear very forcibly, and stop what is around the beak with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the beak; then try to force it out, because many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take glue of what birds use for their nests, and put it on any instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a bit of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and try to force it out. And if it does not follow all these things that we have said, then you haste to split the ear so that an abscess may come, and spasm; and the manner of splitting is that you first bleed the patient from the cephalic vein, and extract blood according to the measure of his virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and making a small split at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the split be like a crescent moon, as far as you come to the bone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it carefully with your mouth; and care for it until it is healed. And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot issue, then administer one spatula thin according to this form:
and administer incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist for the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces of it; then extract it with fine tweezers and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be aligned.
In the ear water therefore that falls on the patient must use of externalities of condiments first, and ample the ear of old cotton. And let him be lying upon that same ear where the water is. If it goes out by this, it is good. If this not, then take many stones according to the length of your finger thin and light, and heat them a little in the fire; and put them in the patient one pierced of his ear, and let him lie on it from his feet another side, and firm one stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease of doing this of stone in stone until the water goes all out, and thus if it goes all out. And if you see, then take one rush, and put one end in the ear, and the other chief hold in the fire until the most soft rush be burned; then make another part of other rushes until the water goes all, as we have said in the stone.
In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, as a flea and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body which one can feel, then administer the extraction of pincers; and this is the thing more light to remove that is in the ear.
In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure it as we have said in the division and where we treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it behooves that you look at the ear in the sun: if there appears any worms, then treat them with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, then take the canine of which here is the form:
And it should be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed forming to all the caine; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the caine of cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out further as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, because of this is the form as you see:
And let it be of silver or of iron, narrow below to one small holes, and above open to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation one instrument of iron well made for this, and if you see take one razor and wrap around the point conveniently cotton; then throw your oil or your juice, and what you see of your medicines in the caine, and let the caine be in the ear; then put inside the razor to all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or at the end of the ear; and let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be one pock heated over the fire thus when you distill them in the ear; and keep that it is not too cold, because the medicine would not be so good.
Of the Stoppings of Ears
No child is born who does not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by the swelling of wounds, or by flesh growing inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes come from within the ear so one cannot see them; and sometimes they have i.e. a point of pus from the hole, and it is seen well.
That one which comes from within so that it cannot be seen, is of great healing in more positions, and for this reason you should put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look inside: if you see the opening apparent, then the work has all this spatula from this.
And be it aged and trenchant before and behind all plain, so that it does not bleach the ear; if the opening is of flesh growing or bone of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and cut it lightly, as long as that flesh is completely removed.
And if the suppuration is in the ear, take one razor subtle and light and heat it a little at the fire, then put it into the ear's flesh. If you feel the suppuration that the patient feels great pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and keep that you do not wound the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and moisten it in Egyptian ointment.
Do this no day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on powdered vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is necessary that you draw out the tent and move another tent moistened in cerote which is made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it as long as it is healed.
And if bleeding comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are or treat distillations.
of the paper of
This ointment that comes on papers of the eyes when they are moist and are dry, so it is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and pincers, and the root with a spatula; then put on its place powdered vitriol.
And if without it decorticate, so cauterize with the lenticular subtle cautery, and the cauterization after the incision is worth mutes; and many times they return, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
of the gristle
Many times come on paper the eyes things that seem gravel in its shape and in its hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hail," and it is a gathering of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the work is such: take ward if the hail moves from one side and another, and this is a light thing to know; then make the large opening, then the skin lightly on each side, then take with tweezers, and the cut. If you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the paper, then it grieves nothing to the patient; and if the fissure is great, so assemble with a stitch, and cure until it is healed; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the ointment restores it quickly and heals flesh.
And if the hail is descending in the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper, and holding the hail with tweezers, cut it and press on both sides; and if the paper is separated by the incision, it grieves nothing; and when the hail is cut, leave the eye of salt water, and cure the place with that which heals flesh until the patient is healed.
of the fat from the eyes
Exinach is a grease that is made in the webs of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and grieves much to their eyes, and they come to them the catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and for this reason they lie down on their faces afterwards, and sleep on, and are their papers under their eyebrows moist that the flower and appearance have covered with the exinach which opens in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinarnach between them.
And the manner of the work is that the patient puts his head on your palm; and then take one drapeil of linen, and prepare a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains exinarnach from each part, then place it on top; and press with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the exinarnach is assembled within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture at the spatula a trenching a slit of a width, and let it not be more than the wound that one makes to the vein; and make the skin apart as far as you come to the exinarnach; and in more dispositions comes exinarnach from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Extract then a whole piece of cloth charpit between your fingers at the outside, and turn your hand to right and left as much as it is spread; and keep that you do not add into the slit, until you come to all the spatula up to the eye, that you do not blind him.
And if the opening does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then gently widen the fissure until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten bandages in oil and water, and place on the site, and restrain with bands.
And if it has such men who grind herbs and place them on top to corrupt the moisture that is present. Then treat it until it is healed. And if an abscess comes to the site, then treat it with soothing ointments until it is healed.
of hairs of the papers
When on paper there grow hairs other than the natural ones, and are inflamed, they harm the eyes, and bring about many diseases such as accustomed tears and softening of the eyelids and albuginea, so much that it is cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to .iiij. manners: either by cautery in all fire, or by medicine aqua according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and is done either by incision and stitching or by cauteries, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, put an awl with .i. thread above; and be it below the edge of the paper or where the hairs grow beside these hairs, and pull .i. thread upwards to all the paper, and turn it back to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the added hairs, to all the spatula copying, from the large tear to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then place on top of the paper a figure of an enclosure, as the myrtle leaf, and nevertheless it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is divided to all.
And if at this which needs it one cuts a large quantity of the paper according to that the paper is softened; then make to all the spatula above the .ij. lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear to the small one; and be it one of the slits near the natural hairs in the width of a root, then put the awl in one of the .ij. angles of the heart, then scrape it all; then assemble the .ij. lips with a suture of an awl with .i. thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make air to the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows to nothing sticky, if you want to do this; and if not, take no care of it, then leave the suture and the threads up to .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without suturing with dry and constricting things, because the paper comes back alive at the bottom of the wound and the assembly of it, but the suture is moved (as they say the ancients), and this work without fear;
and if in another manner: and is that you draw on the paper a figure which is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at three inches wide according to the form which is here:
then cut that which surmounts the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle which has one thread, and put it within the figure; and put one other thread along the large tear, and the second thread along the small one, and assemble between your two threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over what you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound with stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments;
And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the sewing on one and on the other is more artificial.
The cure of the wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and the felt inside according to what I have said, and then make .ij.  caines by art, and .ij.  subtile liens as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and cut the .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on that which rises above the paper of the eye, and strain the .ij. caines of the .ij. parts forming; and let it remain thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and shrink and draw together, until it heals by itself.
If it takes a long time, if you cut it again with more force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn together, and if the paper has been lifted, and the hairs will prick no more; and this is the form of the .ij. caines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
The works is such that you take a fine needle, and put into it 1 thread of silk soft and fine; then assemble the heads and tie one and the other finely, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then order in the chase another thread of silk very thin, and tie the chief of the threads; then put the patient’s head on your own; and be facing the sun so that the work is clarified, because it is a subtle and fine work; then put the needle to all the chase in the root of the hair adjusted, and let it pierce into the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put into the chase that hair, if there is 1 or 2 or 3 or more; then extract your hand until the hairs come forth to all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then you will draw the chase down to all the thread that you have ordered it, until the chase comes forth from the hole above and that you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair hardens in its place and the flesh grows on it; and if the hairs are small, accompany it with 1 long hair of the natural ones, and be raised with that one or you leave it, as long as it is lengthened and then lift it.
of the rot of the eye
When this disease that is called “aleacrati” or rot comes in the eye, if there are .ij. manners: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens by suddenly of wound, or cutting or cautery, and by similar things.
And the manner of the work in it is that you split that suture, and loosen the lips of it, and put inside tents of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not fitting that you use in the cure of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do those things, then the illness returns worse than the first; but work with softening things, such as fenugreek; and the rose of water or althea and linseed seed be cooked, and aqua dijon melted into any of the oils, and envelop a tent, and cure it from that.
And the treasures of your cure is that you take care that it does not close again according to the form that it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing but addresses of this illness, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
of the flesh which comes in the eye
This illness which is called "axacrati" truly is dislocation; and it is natural and accidental.
And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it should, it is good; if not, then take one razor and put it in the fissure, and turn the paper, and make .ij. fissures or cuts inside the paper; and let the heads of the .ij. fissures be the .ij. angles of the incision that you have cut, and make ones angles so that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no "j griech"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its cost is raised below, from those who follow the paper, then join the .ij. separated parts, and sew them with a thread of linen; then cure it with what we have said of softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the malady comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain incision under the hairs of the skin, and according to what is above; then bind between the two leaves of a tent, as I said; and one must do the work according to the form of the malady, because it is very diverse in form, and the sages masters equip everything with all their power how it makes return the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what it is necessary for work and instruments in more dispositions.
of the skin's surface
When this suture happens to a man's eye in such a manner that the skin above is glued with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then it is necessary that you put the point of a razor under the skin, and raise it up; and while holding the tweezers, as long as you cut what is attached to the spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too blunt, so that the patient does not suffer that the spatula too sharp nor bleaches the eye; and let your incision, by which you peel back this assembly, be slight, so that the skin returns to its natural form; and all this assembly is healed, and one never uses salt water in the eye, but rather sweet water, and honey; then put between the skin and the eye a tent of linen, and put on top of the eye wool moistened with oil; and after the third day use the honey and things inward until it is healed.
of the angle of the eye
Know that the angle is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to one hard silk, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and cured burns like pinches, it cannot be; and one and the other semblance begins towards the large tear, and crosses little by little until it covers all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
And the manner of incision is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then opens his eyes; and raise the paper with your hand, then coil the angle with a small doubleure, and lift it upwards; then take a needle, and put in it one hair of horse, or goat, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the point of the needle a little and insert it into the angle, and pierce it all the way through with the needle, and tie the angle with a thread and lift it upwards, and scrape all around the edge of the angle that follows the prunele and silk to the hair until the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the tear with all the spatula subtle and as small forces, and leave the natural flesh or tear, so that through the incision the body of tears does not come as is accustomed; and no times lift the angle only once, and with the thread, as we have said; then scrape it all around the spatula like this is the form:
And guard that the spatula does not touch the fleshy cloth and break it, and that the needle is not pierced; and after the incision put in the eye a little bit of crushed silk, and with the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure it of what it needs until it is healed.
And if the nail is not nerved, and you cannot put the needle, and the tweezers cannot enter, many times this semblance of a nail is cured with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lighter little sharp according to this form:
And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and the reason is quick, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of litharge and red collar and crushed silk, and stop the eye until the next day; then begin the other work according to this same work, until it is completely removed.
If nothing opposes you in the eye, such as an abscess pouch, then milk it and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh near the tear duct bothers the eye by great annoyance, then suspend it with a thread, and cut away a portion but not too much that the flow of tears doesn't come; then distill in the eye red collyrium which is made from litharge.
of the flesh which grows on the iris
The eyes of some men are born at times with red flesh, and it covers the iris and restricts the pupil, turning them outward, resembling a rose of balance; and the work is that the patient puts their head in your hands, then opens their eyes, and coil all that flesh with thread suitable to those eyes, and support it with force; then cut the first piece of flesh, and go on cutting all the way down to the end, and be careful that you do not touch the white part of the eye during this work;  and let the incision be like the spatula which we have mentioned in the incision of the angle, and small forces from which one removes the pupil as this chapter later demonstrates.
and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of silkworm crushed or distill red mercury and similar corrosive medicines, and put on top of the oil cotton with a little yolk, so that it be assured of hot abscess; and if it remains nothing, and the skin closes over, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things soothing hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do as long as flesh is attached in the eye by this manner.
But nonetheless, it is necessary that you heal the cure of each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works as long as you see that this limb suffers that work.
of the veins of the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the eye and take away its work and weaken the eye every day. It is therefore important that you look first at the eye, whether it's good or bad, and there is no other illness except for the red vein; therefore, in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head on your lap, then suspend those veins all over the body according to his wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle double according to this form:
And let two incisions be by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then with this coil you force those veins subtly, and wipe away the blood hour after another, until you see removing those veins outside of the eye; and guard that you do not prick the eye with the points of spatulas, and do this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you only cut those veins; and when you have done this, if you distill green and red collyrium into the eye to corrode what remains of the red vein.
And if you do not have power to collect all these in that hour, so make a plaster on the eye of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and let it for some days until the pains are appeased and be assured of hot abscess, then begin again according to this manner which is before as long as it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
of the fistula of the eye
The fistula is called "arissati": when you treat it with cautery and medicine burning according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is something in it that you cut on the abscess, where it should die, and treat all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is uncovered.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then the ruler has all the tools of this form; and it is called "sharp head," and be made from fire iron to one chief rounded, and be pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
And put on top the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little bit as long as you know that the corruption is reset; and do this several times, then restore the place of drying medications.
If the wound is soldered and it is growing flesh, and the body of the bow is soldered, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew and is not an abscess, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, then there is no other remedy but to bring the fistula back to the opening according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take one forest according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft be tapered until the head as you see here:
then put it on the bone near the tear duct, and move your hand from the eye  i. poc, then turn to all the forest until it pierces the bone and feels the patient by what comes in this if he holds his hand on his nose; and then restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the flesh is born and hardens the places, so goes the matter to the nose; so it is a lighter thing for the patient.
from the issue of the eye
When the eyes are open and there is no disturbance to the nose or lessening, then it behooves you to bind the patient; then heal, then put on suction cups or a haeretel without injuring to suck, then put on the eye  i. linen made of acaice and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and emplaster above with bandages and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take cloths enough soft, and double each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eye has need; then bind it from above with a hard bandage, and restart the suction cups to suck without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the linen softens, then it behooves you to strain it much; then remove the linen after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing, it is good; if not; then restart the emplastering and cloths and linen and suction cups until it is healed.
Of the dislocation of a linen cloth
When a tear comes in the woven cloth, then open it and there come forth like i. grain of resins, and is expectable to see; therefore if you see it covered, the work is such that you put one needle in the root of the lower part until the upper one, then put another needle where there is i. double thread of the part of the seam; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the grape around, and restrain it well, then withdraw the needle and put the other half linen oil in abundance of an egg; and let it stay until the thread falls with the grape, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and at no time the wound is restrained by the grape each part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the eyes give great appearance, then pierce it with a fine spatula which comes from the eye, and correct the albuminous moisture and descend the eyes, and enter immediately; then withdraw it until it is healed.
of the bowel of the eye
This sickness which is called “alcunnati”  is nothing but a bowel which is assembled in the eye, seeming like a thorn descending, and it is not a thorn; and the manner of the appearance of the work so is that you make the sick person sit on i. seat prepared and straight, then take the chief between your hands of ii. parts, and move it as much as you see the bowel coming up to your eyes; then be ens fichie, and do not descend and be discombree the light, and let the sick person see things as he would; and if it does not descend below, know that it is a thorn, and if the descending of the bowel is not appeased as we have said. So make the sick person sit between your hands, then take the spatula subtle and make on the corneal tissue i. poc by the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal tissue and the crown, as much as the bowel issues; and when it is issued, so distill in the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured of other cure until it is healed.
of thorns of the eye
We have done the appearances of needles in division, and those that it is fitting for to perceive; so in work according to health. It is fitting that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light of the sun, and bind their healthy eye and restrain it very strongly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument which is called "almagda," or with your left hand, if the eyes are right; then put the point of the instrument beside the crown by the width of a thread in that white part of the eye at the side of the less tear, then thrust the instrument which is called "almagda" virtuously, and restrain your hand until it pierces in the white part of the eye, and feel that "almagda" comes to the empty thing; and it is fitting that the measure of the way "almagda" is to the perfect measure of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the crown of the eye; so you will see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the cornea, and then put the instrument up to where the needle is, then express it down one way after another. If the needle now goes down, if the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
After repose, i. little, and if the eye goes up the second way, put the force with the instrument, and when it is ens fichie and it does not go up, take "almagda" lightly by turning your hand poc and poc; and then put back in the eye a poc of silk gemme, and leave of ceu the eye inside. Then put on the outside of the eye a stopper or linen soaked in rose oil and abun d'uef, and tie with the healthy eye. Now, and those who are of our time, we put on top as comin broiet with abun d'uef.
And if "almagda" cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men who have their eyes too hard, then it is fitting that you take the instrument which is called "alberit," of which this is the form:
And pierce therefore the conjunctive alone, and do not go too deep in it, but make one subtle, then put almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work equip the patient with one pillow, so that he sleeps on his back in one dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and take light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and let him be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then untie it in this same dark house, and prove his sight, and let him see some things, and then put him back on the band until the seventh day; and it is not proper that you do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you align this because the liquid mounts hastily.
And when the abscess comes, that you untie the eye before the seventh day, and the address of those who soothe the abscess; and when it is calmed, then untie the sight and put on his face one orilliet to cover any day, and be in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and turn back to his affairs; and know that none of the disciples should interfere in this case.
And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda pierce, so that one sucks the liquid, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read it in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of the almond, for those who do not know them they see them; and be of rain properly.
And let the head of the wing of this same subtlety, and the last one in three angles acute.
of the flesh out from the vein
At no time are veins born or joined together diversely, so there are none that seem like scorpions with many legs; and if there are such ones where there is flesh scarred of a bad color, and if there is flesh soft of good color. In that one then of these veins which is soft, and not scarred, it behooves you to make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open his nostrils, and throw the ointment onto those veins, and remove them outwards; then cut what you can sustain with the sharp spatula of one part, until you know that this flesh is completely removed.
And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it entirely i.e., with instruments subtle and light, so that nothing remains; and if there is no swelling or abscess, cover it as it is proper; and if it is a malignant abscess, haste and cauterize it until the blood is extinguished and all the pus is removed, then apply either boiling water or wine.
And if the nose works, and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is clean; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so the instruments cannot come to cut; therefore you must put i. a thread of linen about a finger thick, and be knotted at both ends, and have between each knot a space i. a finger or less; and put the patient's head of the thread into his nostril at its bottom, and draw it gently until it comes out through the nostril inside the mouth; and many times do children in school this way, and it is an easy thing for anyone who wants to do it; then hold the head coming from the nostril with one hand, and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and pull them apart while keeping them which are or thread. Do this until you know that the knots have corrupted that flesh, then draw the thread, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this iii. days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that is left of flesh; and then put on the nostril a poultice of flax for several days until it is clean, and if there is need of drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to cleanse the head, with which one distills the oils and medicines into the nose.
And be it of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a can, and you lead it thus; and if you wish, make a closed can, and let the instruments be full to cleanse the head; and have i. handle at the top for holding it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
of the flesh upon the birth
Many times at the beginning of birth a sickness arises which is called "telul," and it grows and becomes large very quickly, to the point that it is a thing to behold; and for this reason it behooves you to cut it at the beginning, and pull out all the pus, then put on its place the cautery or medicine burning; and if one delays to cut it until it is large, beware, if it is hard, of dark color, with poor sensation; do not touch it with iron because it is an inflamed abscess, for when one cuts it once, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that it can be all cut out, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with things drying and restraining.
When the birth is cut and sewn
Know that when a solution of continuation comes in one of these works cartillages, it profits little because in some men. It is therefore necessary if this happens to any, see if the wound is fresh to all its blood; and then adjust the two lips to a suture, then cure it until it is healthy; and if the lips are already separated on both sides, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their core until they bleed, then assemble the two lips to a suture, and restrain them, and powder over powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and put on top of the powders a piece of ointment of strong or other soothing ointment, and leave it until it falls by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healthy.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suture of the belly; or by thread, as I have let you know.
of abscesses of the lips
To men's hands happen inside the lips abscesses hard, seeming to grains of vezis, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut on each knot, and take it with tweezers and cut it in every part; then apply there after incision of vitriol ground, until the blood is stanched; and then the leaf of aisil, and cure the place of dry things until it is healed.
Of the flesh of the gums
Many times flesh is born on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and leave the wound open for the blood to flow; then put on the place vitriol ground, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this flesh returns after the incision, and often happens so, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
of deafness
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and green, as long as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his jaws be in your saint, and pull out the teeth or scabs appear, until nothing remains; and thus do of blackness and greenishness, and jaundice and other spots, until they are cleaned; and if one removes what is at the first reason, it's good; if those no, so it begins again the second day and the third, until you have all pulled out; and know that teeth need diverse forms of instruments to pull out, according to what the work shows you, because the scraper with which one pulls out outside the teeth have other forms than those with which one pulls between the teeth; and these forms and others be with you equipped.
It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait to draw as much as you can, because one must not do it hastily; for it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to remove. Therefore when the patient is constrained to be treated, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth aching. Many times the pain deceives the patient, and thinks that it is a saintly tooth, and draws out the good tooth; and nevertheless the pain does not depart from him for this reason, as long as the evil remains, because we have already seen this happen to our own kin; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth on all sides with a strong spatula in order to ward off the gums from all parts; then move it with your fingers or with tweezers at the first place and place, as long as it is well loosened, then firmly attach the tweezers; and let the head of the patient be in your lap between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
After you have extracted the tooth straightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take one of these instruments and push it gently into each part, and move it as you did first. And if the tooth is pierced and broken, it is necessary that you fill it with a poultice in the place where it is pierced; and restrain it subtly with tweezers so that it does not break when you pull it; and it is necessary to work very skillfully around the gum in order to loosen the tooth.
And take good care that you do not break it and leave a part behind, and return to the patient through the malice of the root greater pains than the first. And beware that you do not do as ignorant healers do, who by their haste and boldness sometimes break the jawbone, and bring nothing of what we have recounted; but they often bring great disease through the incision of this, for the roots that remain, or because of the jawbone that they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or water and salt; and if there comes a discharge of blood, which often happens, apply to the place vitriol ground; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
The forms of the instruments, to what one moves the teeth first, be long points and big handles, that they do not double when you will draw the tooth; and these are the forms:
And be big members so that they do not bend when drawing, and be of well-made iron, and be toothed for better holding.
of the root of the teeth When the root remains in the drawing, so it is fitting that you put on the place cotton moistened in butter i. day or ii., until the wound be softened, then put the pliers which are called 'algefri', because of this the head seems beak of care; and be inside made also as a file and this is the form:
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh all around the root, and there put the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a spatula, because of this is its form:
And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root leaps out with those, it is good; if those do not, then help yourself with all the instruments, of which the shapes come after:
And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has two prongs, of which this is the form:
and other instruments that are in front in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large pliers, of which this is the form:
And be this instrument so that it may not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not numbered; and the wise masters subtle find by themselves their instrument, according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are such diseases where the ancients do not teach any instrument for the diversity of others; and if one breaks not the bone of the horse or of other bones, as it can, then he seeks the instruments that are necessary, that I have told you, and helps with gestures, of which this is the form: And let them be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then return to its place of medicines suitable for those, and if it has in the bone rot, and it is small, then the king has all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and even in virgin women, then it befits that you know if the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot file or trim it; therefore the edge; and if it is near with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is here, and is similar to a small beak, and let it be of pointed iron at the top:
And the coping a little bit each day for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that one can file it, so the file of a certain form as this is:
And it is also like the file of which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth little by little each day lightly, so that it does not move until it breaks; then the plain at the end to nothing a scraper, and if the tooth is too sharp and it pierces the tongue, so it is necessary to file the sharpness so that it is equal, so that it does not pierce the tongue nor corrupt the speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth in front loosens, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press upon it so that it moves without pain, and you have cured it with constricting medicines, and this is not good; if this is the case, it is necessary to restrain it with a gold thread, because the silver thread becomes green and putrefies, but the gold does not change; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, but according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth misaligned, take the thread and bring it double between the two sound teeth, then put the wires between the bad teeth, if there are one or more, until you come skillfully to the healthy tooth on the other side; then begin again the covering up to the place where you began, and strain your hand subtly and skillfully, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then cut the ends of the thread with pliers, and bring them together, and place them between the sound tooth, and put it in such a way that it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it unties, or the thread breaks, then restrain it with another thread; let it remain and serve in this way until its end, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two sound teeth, and the two bad teeth, as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, fresh against fresh, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and patient should intervene, and sometimes the form of a tooth made from bone of walrus is made, and it is placed in the place where the defect is, and it is restrained as we have said, and remains and serves in this way for a long time.
to cover the ligament of the tongue
Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue or nature; which is born thus; or by accident of a sutured wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is stiffness or knotting, and this is from the suture of a wound, so put the awl and cut the wide ligament; and guard that the cutting is not too deep, for the artery which is below; and when you have done, raise the head with warm water and honey, or cold water, then place under the tongue a tent of linen; and apply the ointment to the sick person every night, so that the ligaments cannot suture. And if bleeding comes, put vitriol ground on the place; and if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize it with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with other cures until it is healed
And if you see it of a fiery color or black or hard, so that the sick person does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining to whiteness, and there is moisture, put the awl and make it with a fine spatula, and deliver it on one side and the other; and if the bleeding persists in your work, put vitriol ground on it until it is extinguished, then return to your work until you draw all out; then raise the head with honey and salt, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
of abscesses of the throat
At times there come within the throat bubbles which are called «godath», and these are properly called the .ij. almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed: if it is abscesses hard of small sense and of fusse color, do not touch them with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the decrease of blood; but let it until it is dead, and then you will divide it, or it would break by itself; and if it is of white color, return, and the root is subtle, have prepared the instrument to cover, but first look if the abscess warms rests and is appeased. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his arms be in your health, and open the mouth and take the serjans between his hands, and press the tongue below all the instrument, from which is the form; and be it of silver or of iron subtle as one knife:
And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, so take the oncine and stick it in the almond, and draw it forcefully upwards as much as you can; and do nothing of the fabrics with it, then cut with the instrument, from which is the form, that seems like forces; but anyway the chief are bent, and one place to the other, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron or d'andainne:
And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pliers, from which is the form:
And be trenching on one side and the other side name; and when you have cut one of the almonds, so cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and thus, and if decorrement of blood happens, so gargle the patient with water, or peels of pomegranates that are cooked, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is cleansed; then cure it until it is healed; and some times other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them as you did the two almonds.
And I medicated a woman of an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of small sense; and I had well closed the whole throat, so that the woman could not expire by the passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she remained thus one day or two. And the abscess was so mounted that it had been put two rains by the two openings of birth. I therefore immediately, and tied in one one incision, then pulled out the thread, and with a great portion of bow; then refit another piece in the other opening of birth, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after which I inserted the incision into the abscesses, and cut a part, and only a little bit of blood came out; and thus was the throat passage of the woman unblocked, and she began now to drink water, and then wine, and did not cease to cut this abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and filled the place that I had emptied, until it became very large; therefore I engaged it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus he remained without growing; and I left those parts, and do not know what God did to her after me.
of the grape
When the uvula is swollen and long, it is called “perpendicular”; and if it is somewhat large and rounded, it is called “uvula”. When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess of the tonsil is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary for you to cut it; and the one that is rounded, assembled, and not long; and it is sanguine or reddish-colored or black, then it is necessary for you to make a shallow incision in it. Because there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its whiteness and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument about which we have made remembrance before; then insert the needle into the uvula, and pull it downwards, and cut it at .i. out of .ij. instruments that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary that you do not cut more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you cut more, it grieves the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear to be cut, then it is necessary that you use an instrument to cauterize the feeling of fear. And the manner of the cautery is sharp and thin. And it is that the patient put his head in your bosom, and then press his tongue with the instrument that we have said or chapter of cautery, and confine with a very hot iron, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and by employing the end of this instrument, because of which this is the form:
And place on his head a hair or one puts the medicine, as the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument to all the medicine on the uvula; and the patient be lying on his side, so that the saliva and the muscles come from his mouth of the medicine within, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the palate; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the uvula, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it burn and the incisions of the medicine be appeased; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it on any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument to all the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres on the uvula; and do this often, as long as the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and fall after .iiij. days or .v.. And if you have need to begin the cauterization of the medicine again, then begin it again, and after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula, with cotton dipped in butter, and purify what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is healed.
This cure is safer than the cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamint and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and wormwood and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in 1 pot, and put it inside, and boil it; and let the pot be well glued with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot have 1 instrument of hair according to this manner: And let it be of silver or iron, and let the one of the heads be put in the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises to the uvula by the caine, until the uvula is mortified; after which it begins again, until the uvula dries out, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a caine and put inside its head a strip of egg, so that the mouth of the sick person does not get too hot; because the strip of egg does not let the vapor heavily burden the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether safe.
Many times a bone or spine of fish, or any thing, gets stuck in the throat; so it behooves you to draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see move the thing; and what does not appear to you and is returned to the throat, it behoove you to make the sick person vomit so that the food is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it will expel the thing through vomiting; or the sick person swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or 1 mouthful of dry bread; and tie to the sponge 1 thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will get stuck, and then you draw it out further; and if it does not come out through what we have said, then take 1 instrument of plank according to this form:
And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and have the head raised high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all of life come to it, nor push in the bone; and move it better that the patient pushes the instrument, because he knows whether it is well or the thing is difficult; so he pushes down, or pulls it up with all the instrument equally, until it is out.
Of the throat's bleeding
No remedy for bleeding in the throat is given by medicine, as I said in the division; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient in the sun, after pressing his tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the bleeding, treat it with all .i. small awl, or fine forceps suitable for this purpose. And if this is not enough, take a well-groomed dog hair, and put it into the throat of the patient, then push in the end of the dog hair .i. hot iron, and do this often. And if the patient is feverish all day. Then take a full .i. goblet of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the bleeding feels the water, it will fall.
And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafoetida, using the instrument that I have described in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times because it will come down without suffering. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take i pot or there are hot coals, and let the bottom be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that one put the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not come out, but comes up to the sinus; and the sinus will now fall, and if it does not fall, then begin the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty things and others, and do not drink water; and then the necessity is that it should be released by this management.
And the form of the instrument that is used to treat the sinus is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers so that they can enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and it has sharpness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot let go; and see here the form:
The chapter on abscesses
Many resemblances of abscesses are, according to what the memory comes after here from one and the other in this book, and are diverse in perforation and size; and it is in .ij. manners which one is in its same semblance, and of those that it holds moisture. And the second manner so is for the places where they are on the body. Because the abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and the abscesses of the fleshy part are other than those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
And if to abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the bow is mature according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crusted, and do not die according to their accomplishment, such as abscesses which are near joints. Because when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves it as long as it is putridly inflamed, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, by which reason it is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or the abscess is near the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, so pierce it then as long as it is mature; and it does not become that you pierce an abscess crusted without accomplished digestion, except that which is near the foundation, that it may not be putrid, and be elongated inside, and a fistula comes; and cannot heal in a great term.
And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is mature according to its accomplishment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and of the swelling and of the softening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where more dependent the place of the abscess, and where it appears to open; and be the perforation of the long one of the body, and if the abscesses are on the hands or on the feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pliability.
In these which are suppurating, according to the member. And when an abscess is in its place filled with flesh, it is worth knowing that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in digestion accomplished, as we have said. For if you pierce it before then, it will lengthen the body of the venom from it, and it is full of much filth; and by chance harden the lips and the depths of it. And if any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member has need. And it behooves that you bring in small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many incisions according to the semblance of the greatness of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it behoves to cover the heart, and cover; when it is become as one drapery, and is deadened, then it behooves to do as is done to buboes: and if there are such that are cut in three angles, and if there are such that one covers as the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the angres; and if there are such where one makes a round size, and other sizes and semblance cuts.
Those who have no chief, as superficial abscesses, it behooves that you pierce them completely; and it behoves when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, then do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part; then plug the abscess until the next day, then do not draw out anything directly; do this many times from great to great, until all the pus is gone; likewise if the patient is of feeble virtue, or pregnant woman, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the spirit trembles at any time with the issue of the pus, that by chance the patient dies, and you do not take it amiss.  Therefore, avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, then wipe the wound, and see if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a flat incision, then bring in tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then it behooves that you put in each one a tent so that it comes one against the other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have covered it around, then it behoves that you fill it with old cotton or shavings of linen rags without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then untie, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, then bring cold water and ice, and wet one drape, and put it on the place where blood is flowing many times. And if the bleeding persists, then bring governance and cure, and the powders that I have said in hands the places in this book, and if it is in winter's time, and the place or the abscess is much nervous, then it behooves that you put on tents and drapes moistened in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the place is fleshy, then it behoves that you put on drapes moistened in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then untie the abscess and wipe it and cure it, as behooves, until it is healed.
And this is important to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
of  the sores
Of the sores on the head that come in small abscesses, and are ways of ours that are in cloth, like the joiner's of a linen, and many are similar. There are some fatty ones, and such that have moisture as well as poultices; and there are those that are hard and stony at the cutting, and there is no doubt that if the artery does not work against it. And the works of the waist so is that you experience to all i. instrument which is called "entromissoire", because its form comes later, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then you let it out from above the long one. And when the moisture is emptied, it peels off without leaving anything behind the hair that contains that moisture, for it returns to where it was when we leave nothing; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and cover those who are left over from the night. And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that there is nothing left from the night; then cure the wound with ointment as seems fitting, until it is healed. And if the abscess holds i. fat, then cut it according to this form, of the long one; and lay your tweezers, and peel it from all sides, and put all your care into extracting the cot from where it lies; and if the artery works against you, do what I have told you later. And so do with the abscess if it is stony, and of the cutting and curing as I have told you.
And the boil on the pus-filled abscess and moist, it is lighter, because there are a few bloods. And if in some of these abscesses or chief where it has no moisture, and of these were i. abscesses that I copied or chief of an old woman; and found the abscess as well as a hard stone, rough and white, and cannot break; and if one had made any of it, one would have done as well to wound as with a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, were those that come to the chief of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should be always at the lowest point, so that they may flow out the pus; and cure as it is necessary.
of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses happen at the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes come from other parts or bodies, and are numerous, and are intertwined with each other. And each scrofulous is properly within its own coat, as well as the pustule of the chief, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrophules are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are some malignant that do not want to obey to health. In those therefore that you see of good disposition at the touch, and is similar to the color of the body, and mute from each part and is not painful to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the conduit, and is not too deep; then it is proper that you cut it from above, and remove the skin from each part, and the two lips of the heart as one piece, if you need them, as we have said in pustules of the chief; and treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and do not make the spathulum too large nor trenching, so that the hands slip, and do not look too far forward, that you do not cut what you should not.
And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, put in the wound powdered vitriol, or any powders that restrain blood, and restrain the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the bleeding is stopped, return to your work, as long as you accomplish it; then with your index finger see if there remain any small pustules, so cut them and clean them. And if in the root of the pustule there is a large vein, it does not befit you that you cut that pustule at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it hang by it, without annoyance; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
And if you cut the whole pustule, it befits that you assemble the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, then as long as there remains no superfluity for the size of the pustule. It befits that you attend to cutting the root of it, and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said. Those pustules that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears more; and pierce it thus as the one before stated, in dependence, then administer tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment causing flesh to grow, until it is healed.
of a hernia
The ancients said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw in our land who did it, and this is the scripture of their word.
For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the slit of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut; and one should not help them, because all the veins and the arteries of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two cheeks. When the illness is in the channel of the artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the peril that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, we must cut it below three or four circles, a small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syfac, not in the cartilage;
and those they are comparable to the section of the epiglottis that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long from it.
And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extend the skin of the throat to the whole opening, then split the skin as much as it comes to the windpipe; and escape the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cut the syfac, as we have said;
and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm of the windpipe that flows out through the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
and leave the wound open for a while.
And when the hour has passed from which one doubts strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew them together alone against the cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, until it is healed.
Albucasim says one does not do this until the throat is completely choked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect comes from the lung. Therefore, one cuts open the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
And for this reason, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. And therefore they commanded to sew up the wound and care for it, until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took  a knife, and plunged it into her throat, and cut part of the channels of the windpipe.
And I was called by her to heal her, and found her as dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had flowed from it, and so well that it had not cut a vein nor led further than the throat, and the wind was blowing through the wound.
I hastened, and closed the wound, and treated it until it healed.
and it came to pass for the young woman that she was red of voice, and returned after to her disposition.
for which reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
of the great throat
This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a bruise, and it is very common in women.
and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; the natural has no engine.
And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which is similar to fat in us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery. and he has fear, and it does not become to work to make outside than in this which is small, and the proof and seeks to all the introducer If you find it also as our fat, and cannot at any vein, if the cut, as we cut ours, and the train to its whole crest, if there is any of it; and surround well soon, and the cure as it befits, until it is perfectly healed.
of ours
Many ways are to us, of which I will say all the likenesses.
And or it is fitting that I say all the difference that is between ours and out.
I say that out is sometimes and fever holding, as long as the boil is not passed, and is accomplished the putrefaction; therefore rests the fever and the heat.
With the ours has no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains .i. cyst, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a blister, and becomes large;
and they are according to two resemblances, whether dry or moist, and very colored as I have said in the division.
It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first of all about the instrument called "entromissoire," according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of the wound is that you prick or moisten the place that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points until you know that the instrument has pierced the core, then that it be according to the size of the abscess;
then withdraw the entromissoire, and take care in those that jump forth.
If moisture runs short, what color it has, do as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the introducer there comes moisture, know that it is fatty, so do it in a cross and take it with forceps, and slightly scarify each side and guard the coat where it lies so that you draw it healthy with the needle.
And if you cannot draw it healthy, then draw it in pieces so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
And if it stays for a little while, and the wound does not grieve, then apply to the wound some sharp corrosive powders, and hold the wound closed, and put above it soothing things, a hot poultice, and cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and cure it with those who generate flesh.
And if the vein beating is contrary or otherwise if you are in haste and apply the place of ground vitriol, and leave it for two days or three, until the wound is rotting, and rests the boiling of blood; then return to cover those that remain from the new.
See here the forms of the introits instruments, and they are in .iij. manners: great and medium and small; and there are .iij. squares which are called «albaret», and .i. that is called «breb», and there are in .iij. manners: great, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula;
and they are also like the needles with which one sews the sorceresses, and they are of citrine iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are more proven black plumb for surrounding the curves of fistula;
and they are in .iij. manners: great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The forms of the hooks are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are hooks which have two curves in three ways also.
And there are hooks which have three curves, and are also in three ways; and there are hooks which have two curves, and hooks of a single curve only, and are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
The chief of these for what they do is cutting, and there are some that do not cut except from one side, with which we scrape the veins, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
And of these instruments are the probes put into handles, so that the patient does not feel them at the opening of abscesses.
and there are of three manners: great, small, and medium, as you see;
and one should not use it except in their fleshy parts, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and groin, and similar places;
and at no time is made one other instrument small, resembling the skin of fists, according to this form, for which one draws blood:
and it is placed at no time in the place that is healthy for opening of veins and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
No times swollen the breasts of some men when they begin to be corrupted, so that they seem breasts of a woman;
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to cure them, should be according to this form of these lines up to .g.: then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound, stopping bleeding, then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and treat it until it is healed;
and if the breast leans down and is softened because of its size as women have, then make two cuts above the ribs, with two similar incisions; Of which one holds to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. until the line .g. Then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and there administer what we have said of stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, for that the patient does not want to rest, or because of the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton moistened in corrosive ointment. And leave it there until it softens the remaining and fat, then cure it until it is healed.
of abscesses of the buttocks
These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are kinds of hard scrofulous nodules in which there is pus.
Those then that contain pus should be cut according to this form, from the line b. up to the line .g.: And when the whole core that is in the abscess is emptied, then apply to the wound some old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment as before to it until it is healed.
And if the abscess is like the appearance of scrofulous sores, then make it as we have said in cutting open scrofulous sores, and if the wound enters inward, administer cautery as we have said before.
of the artery rupture
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn shut, abscesses often occur, and this also happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
And if the expert knows that it is due to the artery, then they should make the abscess longer by cutting. and when you feel it at your hands, that is to say, tightening; and when it is for the vein, it is reopening appears
and it is folly to cover this abscess, and even when it is under the arms and on the neck and in many other places, and is very large. It therefore behooves to avoid the cure of iron, and the one who is at the head also behoove to avoid, and in the one who is swollen from artery that goes through the skin long.
It therefore behooves to avoid the cure of iron, and the one who is at the head also behoove to avoid, and in the one who is swollen from artery that goes through the skin long. then work the opening of the stones, and separate beautifully the artery from the cloths, as long as it is uncovered;
Then put beneath it a needle, and make it pierce until the other side, and restrain the artery with a double thread in 2 lengths, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the 2 arteries that are in the temples.
Then point the place which is between the 2 links of an intromitter as long as the pus issues from it, and let the abscess be discharged.
Then administer the cure that engenders a boil, as long as the link hangs. Then cure those which are anointed coming to these, as long as it is healed.
and if the abscess is at the size of the vein, then you must hold with your hand that which you can of the abscess to all the skin then push the needle under where you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and there be i.i. double thread, so that you draw it to the other side then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it from one of the two parts to the two ends of thread
and if you doubt that the threads are not firm enough, then insert another needle into all i. thread under the whole abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four loops
then cut the abscess until the superfluities issue from it, then cut the superfluity of the heart and leave what is tied;
then place one cloth moistened in wine and oil, then administer treatment of tents and ointments until he is healed.
of abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses come in the artery and vein, abscesses also come in the nerves when they are  worn out, or by too much work, and similar things.
And this happens more often in the shoulders and hips and in all the places where there are joints, and it is i.e., grief abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many positions without pain;
and when one holds it firmly, the patient feels pain, and is not at all part of the body, but below the heart;
and it moves well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and the one who is in joints should not be covered with iron: for fear that there would be a contraction;
and the one who is at the top or on the forehead, makes the skin like a spatula. If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root;
And if it is large, suspend it with the scalpel, and flay it, then scrape it, and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it is healed.
Of large boils hanging Never happen in the belly and nowhere else, and is a disease that is called “fungus” because of the resemblance to it, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are small ones and very large ones.
and I saw one man who had two stomachs that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and they had small roots, and they were slightly split, and some moisture came out of them.
I cut them open and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work in the incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of subtle root;
if he cuts with a spatula wide, and be in your presence the cautery to fire. For at the cutting comes many times too great decorremens of blood, and if the without you vaint, so then hasten to cauterize;
And if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one thread of lead well made, and tie the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then restrain it, and do not cease restraining the lead thread until it heals the joint, and heal by itself without work; and if the roots are large, fear to cut even together for the belly, but you may well cut half
then cauterize it that it not return; then cure the wound, and guard that you do not cut the tendon which is of dark color and poor feeling and with milk-like appearance.
For this is an abscess festering, and I will come to the cure of syphilis later on.
When the skull is moved
If the appearance of the skull comes from a cautery wound or fissure of the sfiafac, and is on the belly and has no bones, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was said before, or of windiness;
and if it is by the rupture of the sfiafac and the exit of the bone, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens from various exits. And if it is because of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses it with his hands, it returns up, and then comes back down, and perhaps it is closed, and grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and for strong labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it; and if it is due to blood, it opens by these signs the abscesses are large and hard, and are filled according to a quantity.
And if it is due to windiness, it is puffed up when touched, and the work is that you look if its appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness. Then it is necessary that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in this chapter of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestine or the belly, then you must command the patient to hold his arm, and be outstretched straight, then place a hand all around the belly; then command him to breathe deeply between your hands; then go around the place that you have marked with all the spatula; then extend the half of the abscess upwards to the whole great incision;
Then open half of the abscess extending on the linen, and put your index finger into it, and explore its interior. If you find it caught by the linen, untie it, and bring the intestine out to the outside of the belly;
And if you find it boiled, take it with the forceps, and cut away the excess.
And if the artery or vein opposes you, then go well around, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two for threads, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross that you make appear;
Then strain the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place as long as it can rot, and let the dead flesh fall by itself; Or cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat it as appropriate, and shave the abscess as we have said;
Or cut it when it is subtle and rotten, then treat it as appropriate, and shave the abscess as we have said; And extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the place as appropriate, and close the place;
Of the ulcer
We have said in the division the resemblances of ulcers, and how one must work them by medicines, and how one must avoid the cure of iron; and let us say the ulcer is prevented in the marshlands, and great caution should be exercised in its treatment, and ancient ones said that when an ulcer is in a place where one can shave it like an ulcer which is on the breast, and in the hip, and in similar places, and one must remove it entirely when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it is not proper that you approach it, because I have never been able to heal any of them; nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
And the work, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once; then make him bleed if he has a manifest repletion; then make the patient's good bed to perform the operation; then lay your forceps or ulcer, and shave it on all sides, and take away everything completely without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run out entirely, and gently press the place with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding from the wound goes against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it as long as the bleeding is extinguished; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
of dropsy We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and the one that is cured by iron; thus it is outlined only; and one must not touch with iron in these 2 resemblances: namely, tympanites and hyposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit, see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as cough and solution of belly and similar things; if you do not touch with iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other illness besides dropsy alone, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must thus work: lift the patient upright with your hands, and the ministers press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the bottom then take the  spatula spineous according to this form: And be trenchant in 2 parts at the point, and nevertheless, it should not be so deeply that it can come until the intestine when it is put in, and do not let it bleed;
then look if the dropsy is established towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you cut above the belly three fingers straight below the nipple; and if the dropsy is from the disease of the liver, then make your cut on the left side of the belly three fingers; and if it is from the spleen, then on the right, and it is not proper for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not run to the weak place;
then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and bring it out, and raise your hand to the whole spatula between the skin and the syfac as much as in scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or less; then pierce the syfac until the spatula comes to its place eight, and this is the place of the water, then the pull out this instrument because this is the form: And it is similar to a silver needle fine, and it is of iron or archaut light, and in the lower part one small hole; and on one side three holes; and two on the other; and one on the other; and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision with which scribes cut the feather:
at the head above is the alemmele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now on the instrument; empty therefore half or a third part, because if you empty more than it is necessary in that hour, by adventure the patient may die for the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he falls faint, or he approaches death;
But in void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick person signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and hold the water, and it is held now for the heart which stops the opening which is on the syfac, because of this I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner; then begin the instrument again another day, if you see the sick person suffering those, and treat of the water a little quantity.
Do this no day, and guard yourself from following until there remains but a little bit of water. And if you doubt about the sick person, and you let him much water, then cure of the burial or hot sand, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if he stays to drink; and cure of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
Of the stoppage of the penis Sometimes a child is born without an opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its place. If this is the case, it must be treated as soon as possible with a very fine needle according to this form: then put a very fine plug of lead into the opening, and tie it and keep it there for three or four days. And when he wants to urinate, remove the plug, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and perhaps it is not necessary, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed. Those whose opening is small, if they are treated with the lead plug as we have said, it will widen. Those who do not have the opening in its place are blueish because none are born with the opening at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they raise their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies supine on his back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum raised as high as a feather, so that the opening is in the middle, as it should be; and guard against bleeding which often comes, and if it happens, let him who stanches blood stanch the wound until it is healed.
of the blisters of the penis Many times these blisters come to this [area] of the penis, and is a loathsome appearance of flesh; and there are malignant ones and non-malignant ones; so it behooves you to prick them with .i. one subtle needle, and scrape and clean all of them, then put on cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed. And if the blister is malignant, of putrid color and stench, then it behooves you to bring cautery to it. When you have scraped it, and if the blister is in the bottom of the penis, and has part inside the flesh and part outside, then it behooves you to remove the blister that is inside first; and when it is healed, then cure the outside. For when you cure it altogether, it is not as certain that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackening and corruption come in its penis and scrotum; so it behooves to cut away all that which is black and corrupt, then put on a plaster of honey and flour that is made from the bark of pomegranates and vetives, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the hemorrhage occurs, administer the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery helps in two ways together: that is to say, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must pour or conduct a chain of lead from the penis and piss on the patient among; and when the skin is raw at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary that you scarify it with one instrument, until the tendons are loosened, and the head of the penis is delivered from all sides.
And if it is a grievous thing to discuss these, then it is necessary that you scarify it with one spatula none in the head of the penis and the skin; then sever gently between two, and put one fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not dry out.
of circumcision
Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our will, and properly on children, then it is necessary that we make the best work, and the lightest to health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcision of their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have no more than what we have acquired by experience.
Because I have seen the most part of the masters and healers who did circumcision around one [inch], and with force, and to all a new knife; so it was good because there are two layers, and by chance if one chops above and remains the lower one.
Or it is better to cut and the pain is doubled, and at the purification which is around one inch [of distance from the glans] the point of the member is not guaranteed; and at the purification of the angle by chance the iron escapes, and the work is spoiled, and many times they are born such that they do not need purification and I have seen it.
Of the modification which is made with forces to the whole line of thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly as well above as below.
For when you press your hand, so it cuts equally in one whole tension; but that the thread be well wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only making him tie the thread around the rod so much, and then make it enjoy in all the ways that you can; then make it stay between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow or heart, and drive it upwards as long as the head of the rod is inside; then purify it well of the dirt that is assembled in it, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one pock at another thread; and hold it as two points by the second league to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two leagues, then lift the heart upwards gently and drive the head of the rod;
then make it stay between your hands straight, and place the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the rod and blow or heart, and drive it upwards as long as the head of the rod is inside; then purify it well of the dirt that is assembled in it, then tie the place with a double thread, then tie it below one pock at another thread; and hold it as two points by the second league to the pouch and to the index finger, and cut between the two leagues, then lift the heart upwards gently and drive the head of the rod; Then let the blood be cauterized again and again because that is the treatment; and put powder on and on the powder one drape made of a cooked egg white tempered with rose water, mixed with fine rose oil good and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
The form of the forces in the unification thus is this: the two shoulders should be held and be sharp, and the shoulders also as large as the palms equally.
The error of the unification is when the kernels inside are at the incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the leaus make an abscess; and cut it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
And if they trespass three days, and what is below the rod is swollen, let it be so until the abscess has calmed, and the scab slightly; then cut it as you can move, and keep away from the part of the rod, it will not hurt him at all.
Cure therefore the place of things suddenly wound powder, that we have said or treated of powders, and if one cuts out too much, and it goes above, it will do no harm; cure it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
of urine retention
The holding back of urine is from a stone in the kidney, or from blood clotted, or from bowel, or from new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division.
And if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in the kidney or at the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent on his knees; and his feet should be placed on his back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient’s legs as much as he can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to the expression of the stone upwards, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with every instrument that is called "syringe," of which this is the form: and it should be made of finely crafted light silver, like the feather of a bird; and its handle should be half a palm long, and be thin at the top.
And the manner of the exit of urine is that you take one double thread, and tie to the head one pock of wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut the superfluity of the wool and put it up to the head of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and aubin of egg, and make the patient sit on one seat, and raise his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and tepid water;
then gently put the syringe in the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the belly; then put the syringe forward up to the bladder, and feel the patient come until the thing is empty, and this is not done according to this order unless for those that the conduit or where it goes is twisted; then extend the thread to all the wool pock and pock, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it further, and do correct the urine;
and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is aligned.
of the diseases of the bladder
When scrapes or blood come in the bladder, or rot is gathered there, and you see it distilled with sharp waters and medicines, so do to all the instrument that is called "clepsedre," and this is its form:
It is closed, and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and its lips should be such that the medicine does not escape well,  stopping the shaft without addition, so that if it can be drawn out the moisture, and pushed when necessary;
and when you want to put your medicines in the bladder, place the chief of the tube into the moisture, and draw through the tube that is inside; so you will draw the moisture to the tube, and then firmly reinsert the tube back inside; so the moisture will enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
And this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder: it is here:
And it is of silver or of brass, and the head is higher; and under to one breast or where the shoulder joint falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture with which you want to enema the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts formed by a double thread, and heat one fistful of that moisture over the fire; then put the head of the enema into the penis, then strain your hand on the bladder throughout the entire administration of the moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder;
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make one circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put one strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a bowl, and put inside that which you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, by pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
of the stone
We have said in the division the manners of stone, and the extraction together medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone engendered as reins, and all the signs, and in what stone one must work with a size; and in the bladder, and in the member; and I will tell it to you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which is engendered in the bladder often happens to children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears harene, and grieves the patient his member, and he can many times, and then urinates; and with much of these jumps the foundations; and it is light the healing of the children until they have four years, and it is very grievous in old people, and it is as the middle to those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter of those who have the large stone, than of those who have the small one.
And when we come to the cure, it is convenient first to purify the patient by clyster, in order to draw out all the mucus which is in the intestines. For it encumbers sometimes to search for the stone.
Then take the patient by the feet, and dislocate and move them down so that the bladder descends to the front of the pubis, and it comes out from its high place. Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is all declining downward; then the queue and touch it inside.
If you feel the bladder in the space, then hurry now to cut above the bladder. And if it does not fall at the touch of all, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger, if the patient is an adult; and put it into its foundation, and feel the bladder, and when you feel it with your finger, push it towards the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your finger, and put it outwards where you want to cut.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend with his right hand the scrotum upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the scrotum in the part where the incision is made; then put the spatula cutting, for this is its form:
And place between that which is between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip; and be straight upon the stone, and the two sides should be either equal or foundation, and let the waist be like a traverse so that it is wide outside, and inside narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, nor too large;
By chance the press if the two sides which are either foundation, that it jumps forth without work; and know that there is such a stone which has angles, and margins: so it is hard to insert; and if it is such as is below, seeming like a gland, and round, whose issue is light.
To that one therefore where it has angles and margins, make the waist larger; and if it does not jump, then you must extract it with tongs which are like a file at the chief, in order to constrain the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below the one instrument subtle curved at the chief; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge one pock the opening, and if it is without decortication, then strain it with vitriol;
and if there is more than one stone, first put the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull the larger, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more. And if it is very large, it should be softened, and make a larger wound. Because two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through where the bladder cannot close; but nonetheless try to drain it, or to break it with pliers, until you pull it out in pieces.
and when you have completed your work, apply to the wound incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top one bandage moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then support the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
And when you untie it, thoroughly wash the area with oil and water, then treat it with diaphicon ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
And if abscesses come in the wound and corrosions, and clotting of blood in the bladder, and because of this retained urine, which is known in such a manner that without leap with the urine: therefore put them all in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and burn it;
Then lift the wound of water and ease and soil, and help him in all the ways that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, that you tie his two thighs, and assemble the medicines on the spot.
And if the stone is small, and it is or conducted by the shaft, and fixed therein, and the urine cannot pass; so cure him of what I say thus, that you cut it many times, and one excuses the cutting by this cure. I have already proven this.
Take one piece of iron forest according to this form and be it at three angles fitted into one twig:
Then take one thread and tie it around the shaft below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the forest in the shaft lightly, until it comes to the stone; and turn the forest in your hand in the stone poke and poke, until you can feel the stone from the other side; so will come soon the urine, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the shaft. Then is it broken, and jumps out with the urine, and is healed the patient;
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie one thread below the stone and another above, then make the shaft straight against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the clotted blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
of the stones of women
It happens sometimes that a stone is in women, and if it happens at any time, the cure is grievous, and is forbidden for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-knowing who reveals herself to the eyes, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well-knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deeply set than the stone of the man, for which reason it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear.
And if necessity demands this, it is necessary that you take a midwife well-knowing, and try to find one. And if you cannot find one, then take no less than one chaste woman who is subtle; and present her with a sage woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command her about the incision of the stone;
And look well if the woman is a virgin: therefore she must press her bottom or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain it under her buttock, and recommend to her that she presses her buttocks or con the sick person, and seeks and presses her left hand on the bladder.
If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it from great to small from the entrance of the bladder down until it comes to the root of the thigh; then place above the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle of the buttock, where it is moved and appears, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her buttocks above the stone or below, and let the waist be at first little.
then press the root in the waist, if you feel the stone so close to the wound as much as the stone can possibly come out, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and large and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and which have veins. If you know the likenesses to know the outcome.
And if the stone is not removed, put ground vitriol on it and hold it there for an hour until the stone is softened; then return to your work, as long as the stone is gone, and have instruments that I told you in the extraction of stones for men to help you in your work.
And if the stone does not come out, and it is from the artery that was cut, put the powder on the wound and restrain it with strips and bandages, and do not start again those things, and leave the stone and do not touch it at all, in case the patient dies; then cure the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed and the wounds are healed, then return to your work, as long as the stone is gone.
of flesh hernia
Aquatic ramice is nothing else than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is from the heart of the testicles, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is i.e. another egg; and it is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have said; and these do not have se poc non.
And the generation of this ramice is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and is spread that matter.
And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: either it is declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more.
and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is or white as we have said, then the abscess is ripe, i.e. long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the edges because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture in the skin itself, then the abscess is ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg;
and if the moisture is between the skin of the edges and the white as we have said, then one feels it well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture,  examine the entire introducer quickly, for its shape is described above. According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside.
According to this therefore which comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside. And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he lies on his back, on a thing a little high, and puts under him much of cloth;
then he sits on his left side, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart of the sides;
then he takes the spatula, and cuts the skin of the sides among them from their long side up to near their armpit, and let your cut be straight dividing the skin of the sides until it reaches the white fat, and the eschar is carefully removed according to his strength;
Then pierce the abscess full of water with one large opening, and draw out all the water, and then put your dressings, and raise the abscess up; and do not touch the core of the boils, but only the abscess; cut all or by pieces equally the skin around it, that if you do not cut it well carefully, the water will return.
And if the ulcer should be of your work, then reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the abscess; then assemble the two leaves of the core of the boils to one suture, and then cure it like other wounds, until it is healed.
And if you find the ulcer corrupted by another malady, then it behooves you to tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flowing of blood; then cut the boil at all its suspension, and draw out the ulcer, and cure it as we have said.
And if the sharp is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you have done the first evenly, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound a linen cloth half-soaked in rose oil;
And put another piece of linen soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the two cushions, and put double cloths on top, and bind it above all the linen according to this form:
Then take two cloths, and use them of wool padding according to this likeness and be assembled by stitching in the groin of the breeches, and one of the shoulders rests on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the armpit; and the other from the top above the two angles, and let the entire restraint be assembled in the loop of the breeches;
And sometimes this branch of cautery is medicated in place of iron shears, and that you prick one cautery knife subtle, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac containing the water is uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that syfac at once, and burn it with this subtle hot cautery:
And the cut in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape all; and guard that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salutary; and moves guards against blood loss, and movements than the works of shears;
And if no thing makes contrary to you, or abscess or running of blood or other thing, so cure that which makes contrary to you, according to what is before said.
And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to await this work because of its horror, so administer perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are well certain by the significations that we have said that watery root is there,
so make the patient sit upon a high seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below to all the spatula width, and put the perforation long along the body; and be wide the perforations, so that all the water runs out;
then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and let for running out the remaining of the water, then cure it as long as the wound is healed;
And if the white cloth does not allow the water to flow into the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you pour a pen or the instrument with which one treats the water of hydrophics, for its form is before; and widen i. pc the wound, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after .vj. months or as long, and when it is assembled like before, and so will pass the patient his days.
of the abscesses of the testicles
Know that in the section of this nerve fear comes to more dispositions, for which it seems to me better that one leaves it.
and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come to the body, and even to the genitals; and this is by many causes.
That is to say, by excess of sour and sharp humors that are spread to the genitals, or from percussion;
and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and it finds no pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
And by adventure are some abscesses grievous and painful, and of dark color, and sometimes comes from our artery, or from the swelling of a vein.
When it is by our artery, then it is known by the disposition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers. And it does not behoove you to touch it.
That one which is made from the swelling of a vein is known by its disposition at the expression of the touch of the fingers.
and one can well make a cut on this likeness, and on the other parts. and it is that you cut out the core of the onions, then let the leaf be on top, and the trunk further down white, and free the suspender from all parts of the leaf.
If the leaf is already sodden with these new onions, then it is necessary that you pull out the leaf, and cut.
and if it is dry in the white part, or in that which is inside the vessels, then it is necessary that you free all of that membrane, and cut it roundly.
And if the birth of the shaft is or its rear, then it behooves you to cut it entirely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
And when the works are completed, apply the wound to wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then dress it with other dressings until it is healed.
Of the abscess of the testicles
This is an abscess enclosed in an envelope resembling i.e., a tunic, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient moves badly when he goes;
and the treatment of this malady is as well-prescribed as fearsome as this one before.
and nonetheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you make the patient sit on one elevated seat, then you tie the suspensory of the testicles down to his two legs to all the vessels that are near to the penis, and the masters braid them, and the extend form.
then cut with the sharp spatula wide through the vessels, until they are uncovered,
and then peel from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
then insert an awl where it has one double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein came from, and tie it straight to the other end; Then cut the flesh in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
Then cure the wound as with others where we prevent bowing, so that no vessel leaks that nourishes one of the sides;
For through these there comes no harm, and if to all the vessels comes life, then it is necessary to draw the sides to all the vessels; so that the flesh does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dries out and cannot be aided.
of the rupture of the shoulder The occurrence of this damage is by the section that comes on the shoulder, or the extension above the belly in the part of the angles, so the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the corners.
And this rupture is on the shoulder, or from the extension of it, and these 2 manners of many causes: either by percussion, or by jump, or by straining, or by lifting heavy burdens, and by similar things.
And the signs when it is from the extension of the shoulder, are that there are throbbing pains, in long periods, and do not come suddenly. and is the abscess even up to the forehead, because of which the pus quickly reaches the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of the section of the pus, that it brings at the beginning sudden pain, and the abscess appears diversely, under the skin near, and this is for the issue of the intestine and the body outward from the pus.
And sometimes the intestines with the abscesses, and are held in, and cause great pain to suffer the patient, even when it is pressed.
And in these treatments of iron there is fear, because it befits to avoid them.
And the manner of the work is that you command the patient to push the intestine into its place in the wound, if it can enter. then either bind it on its neck between your hands, and raise the hips;
then stretch the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the groin long; then put inside the folds of the waist a point according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that the intestines can issue forth;
Then skin the area beneath the flesh of the buttocks as much as the white flesh is exposed on all sides;
Then put your index finger into the following buttocks, where it is between the white flesh which is beneath the skin of the buttock, and between the second flesh;
And depart that which is behind the buttock, and between the second flesh; then move with your right hand into the heart of the buttocks, and keep the white flesh on top at your left hand, and raise the buttock to all the flesh towards the waist; And command the assistant that he extend the buttock upward, and untie what is behind the joint;
and if he has any point of the intestine wrapped or white in it hard, and if you find any of these things, put it into the belly below.
Then take a needle or it has 1 thick thread made of 10 threads, and put it into the rear part of the white hard substance, which is after the skin of the buttocks; after the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are 4 threads. then gather them one on top of the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the white substance, which we have said is below the skin of the buttocks, with a strong binding of 2 parts. Then wrap the hairs of the threads, and tie them together in two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, except for an abscess that comes. and place the linen straight according to the first linen long two fingers of that one, and after these two linens leave the from under the heart of the groin the greatest of a finger.
and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is under the skin of the groin, as much as the without correction, and the bow, as we have said before.
then administer wool moistened in oil, and put it in the wounds, and there administer the linen that we have said. And at no time is cauterized the white groin that we have said, after the incision, out of fear of a decrease in blood.
For this happens many times, and let the linen be left until it is soaked through with it; and if it delays in falling off, make it rise with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
Then cure the wound with another dressing, until it is perfectly healed.
of a fleshy hernia
In this matter, I never saw anyone daring to cure it with iron.
And the ancients said that it is made like a branch that is assembled to the head, in such a manner that you tie the vessels after the cut above or slightly below.
Then cop it in half, and treat the abscess of those who work, as long as the vessels bleed; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Sometimes a rupture comes in the bowels, as we have said, and opens them; and do not draw any of the intestines out to the anus, and if any are drawn out, it is bad, and repair them immediately.
And nevertheless if it remains too long in this spot, the wound or syphilis will grow, as long as the intestines are drawn out.
and this happens by the extension of the sinew which is at the angles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflated its parts and open;
and the cure of this is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is cured by iron in this manner:
and it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cuts the place of the rupture inflated with a breadth according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then pulls out the sinew which is under the skin that has become accustomed, then takes the red lead and puts it on the place appearing of the sinew;
and the press at the forefront of the belly, then sew the two apparent ones of the back above the top of the spine, and sew one and the other
then extract the top of the spine, and do not cut of the back nor stretch any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of the root of the intestines;
then cure it by the cure of wounds. And when you cut the threads, if the wound is infected and cures the wound, as long as it is healed.
The back is constrained, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
of the softening of the skin of the genitals
Many times the skin of the genitals is softened in some men, because the things that are inside are softened, and it is seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and he cuts the skin which is softened on the natural skin; then join the two lips with a suture, and if you see, stitch first the superfluity of the softened skin to three or four firmly; then cut between the sutures, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and remove the thread.
of the  treatment
Know that treatment is common in our law, and for this reason I would like that I do not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two ways: one of which is that the mires know how to answer when they are asked, and they know the cure; and the other because we often need treatment from some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and rams and other animals. I say therefore that treatment is done according to two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting.
of the hermaphrodites
Hermaphrodite is according to 2 manners as men: one if it is that between the 2 genitals appears also as the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in short the urine. And the other manner is in women, and has on the groin as a penis and 2 genitals.  And the cure of the man and of the woman is that you cut the chars attached all, and the cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine leaps through the skin of the genitals, there is no cure.
of the tenting
Tenting is a growth attached to the natural part, as long as it is too unsightly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you cut away the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or tweezers, and cut it lightly; and don't go too deep, so that bleeding doesn't come, then the cure of other cures until it is healed; and to another growth that arises at the mouth of the vulva, and the employment, and perhaps jumps out, and is according to the likeness of a cow, and for this reason they call it by the ancients "cow disease." If it is necessary that you cut it as we have said the tenting, and cure it until it is healed.
of wandering
of wandering if the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accident by illness that has come to it; or it is by char ajostee, or dou syfac subtil or espés, and is made em parfont in the marris, or in costez, or desoz, or where so ever; and deffent the conceiving, and the childbearing, and by chance the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these si is by the regart of the baile. If the estoupemens is prochiens apparans, if quier a tes dois or au rait. If it is dou syfac subtil, and it is prochiens as .ij. leivres, if haste, and the ront ensi: put tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, and the woman be sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; then estent the .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, and soit overs li estoupemens; then pren laine, and the moille in oile, and the met sus le leu, and gise the woman a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. And if the syfac is dur and espés, if covient that thou lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. If the estoupemens is de char nee, if la sospent a l’oncine and the cope; and aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; then amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; and ensi soit longement, and li amenistre une tente de lin sec; then soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez. And quant en la marris comes char nee, if covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.
of hemorrhoids
Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without care, become accustomed, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hardened; and we have said in the division the likenesses of those, and the signs, and I will say here those which resolve cure.
abscesses of the anus
Many manners of abscess come in the anus, such as chancre and pus-filled abscesses and herpes and boils and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. Thus it behooves me to say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes in the anus, which is not of abscesses that boil over; and if you want to know the work of iron, then look at whether the abscess is angry at its beginning and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red you can see it.
of childbirth
It is first for the midwife to know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desire to smell the air: then she hastens the child to come out; so you know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it is the head coming first, and the second one with it; and when you see these signs, it behooves to gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; for when it descends on its head, the second one comes with it, and the body is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes comes on its feet, and comes out from the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where it comes on her belly, or back, and is converted by chance on her neck, and by other bad figures; so it behooves the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must help her.
If the child comes on its head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth loudly, and the virtue of her is weak, then she make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her; and anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then put the midwife between her thighs the small spatula whose form is here: And cut the secondine, and cut at its fingernail until the moisture that is inside is gone; and take the belly of the woman as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to enema the woman with fenugreek muslin with sesame oil; then make her drink and sneeze from condiment, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: so now the child will come out. And if the two hands have emerged, then you must gently reset them bit by bit; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on one seat, and lift her feet up; then turn the seat over on the ground, and hold the woman so that she does not fall when turning it over; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut the hands at the knife which is before placed, and extract the child, and reset them equally.
From the issue of the child on its feet When the child comes on its feet, then it is necessary to push upwards and then turn it back and forth, until it is even;
then prick it with one of the tools and extend it back and forth.
It cannot jump to the hips unless commanded to be pulled, and it is extended from its condition; if it jumps, God willing.
And if it is not healed as we have said, then return it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure. For then it is gently set.
And if it does not come healed as we have said, then take a piece of alum, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything in one mortar; and put it on the woman's genital area inside and outside this ointment, then let him sit upright on his heels up to under the ribs;
and when it is softened underneath, let him apply a cloth of myrrh, and put it under, and leave it for an hour; then let him sit on a stool, then let him sneeze and restrain his mouth and nose, and take hold of his belly gently, because the child is now jumping. from the exit of the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, then he puts his hands palm to palm.
from the exit of the child who comes out with a wide hand during it is necessary to devise to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lie down, and go away.
If it cannot go, put it to lie on i.e., bed, and the legs are straightened.
Then administer the ointment that I have recounted;
and if she does not give birth, put her to sit on i.e., a stool, then study how to bring back the hand; and turn the child according to the natural figure, and make her sneeze, and command her to  be rubbed until the child comes out.
of the issue of the child on his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned towards the back of his mother It behooves the midwife to hold her hand, then turn it gently back and forth, and the elbow lightly.
and when it is straight, she places it on the padded surface of the altar and oil, as we have said, then she commands her to move it back and forth.
and when you have done this, she makes her sit on one seat and commands her to breathe; and the child sneezes. in this same manner to all the backbone
in this same manner to all the backbone When it comes to be cured in this manner for all the backbone, so cut the backbone at your finger, until the moisture is emptied.
and if the child can't stand on its face and neck, then cut from the bulge so it is not held back, and let the child die;
then put the child inside, until you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman not to take it out at all;
from the separation of twins Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four; and this is not a strange thing, and it happens. Two are a strange thing, and do not live, if they are named;
I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the sifac who divides them, which is attached to the bud.
And at times they emerge as naturally as one from under, as we have said.
And if they emerge harshly, then the cure is as we have said, and let the bailiff be subtle, and quickly and lightly do what she does; and thus act as it brings salvation. of many children
of many children Never are they formed in the marshes i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more up to fifteen, and all are formed into the shape of a child by the measurement of its wise glory
and it behooves the bailiff to know all these things, for by chance similar things happen. so it is done according to what is fitting
of the dead child
When you cure a woman of a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands. so it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound virtue and does not have an accident or she fears death.
so it is necessary that the woman be supported on her back, and her shoulders inclined downwards, and her legs raised.
and the minister sets the comb of two parts, where it is tied to the bed so that it does not touch the descent of the child;
then rub the mouth of the mare with moist oils with mucus of altea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint the boy's hands with these oils and these mucuses; then put them gently in the mare, then put one fistful where she puts her hooves that are suitable to those,
and take ward if the child is appearing that he descends onto his head; If you put the incisions in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or below the beard or in the armpit or near the ribs
and if the descent is on feet, put it or prick at the sides of the body.
and it is necessary that he holds the incision with his right hand, and puts the curvature between his two fingers of the left hand, and pushes it gently with all his hand, and put the incision in any one of these places that we have said, until it comes to the hollow place;
Then place against another bone, or the third if you need it, so that the extraction is even.
And then make it even by moving it from one side to the other, so that it moves easily, and let the bones be toothed so that they hold, as is shown here.
And if a part remains, anoint the bail with some of its oil, and put it into that part, and pull the other part.
And if none remain, put this bone or higher up its place, and do this until it comes all out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by tightening. then you must envelop it in a cloth, as long as it persists;
then the bandage at the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and so you must do in the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the joint of the child is swollen and it protrudes, or there is a sharp point assembled. If it is necessary that you put the pointed spatula between your two, and making the chief and draw out the water. or you will do it with the instrument which is called “almidach”, because the form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one;
and thus same, do if the child has a great head naturally; and then draw out the bones with pliers,
and if the shoulder jumps back and is forced into place, it may be split open as long as the moisture which is or worse has come out.
and if it cannot be moved, cut it into pieces as much as you can.
And if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you should pierce it until the moisture flows out.
And if the child is on his feet, then the traction is light, and the application to the mouth of the wound is light.
And if it is lodged in the belly or in the breast, then it is necessary that you draw it out with i.e., wrap it wrapped around the hand; and make the belly or breast, as long as the moisture which is there dries up;
and if the other members are dislocated and the head remains, then push the bail his hand into the marrow, and pull it up to the mouth of the marrow; then it puts one or two, and the skin will become
and if the mouth of the abscess is narrowed because of the heat that has come, it does not need to be worked on but rather it is necessary to administer moist and fatty things; and administer plasters, and soak in softening and moistening water.
And if the child is on its side, and you can put it straight, then administer what we have said in a living child;
and if one has no power over it, then the thigh shall be treated in parts, and leave nothing of the secondine.
And when you have done this, then administer what we have said concerning abscesses which come in the marrow;
and if discharge of blood comes, then it shall be put in a sharp restraint, and administer other cures to him.
And I saw a woman in whose belly a child had been stillborn, then conceived another on top of it, and refused the other life. After a long time, it came to her an abscess in her belly, and swelled so much that it opened, and began a great discharge.
I was called to the cure, and I thought long about it, and could not close the wound.
I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and out came a bone, and after some days another. I was amazed greatly because this belly has no bones.
If I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to examine the wound, and with my hands touched the bones, as long as the woman was in better health. and I felt the woman for a long time like that, and it seemed to be coming back together slowly from its place;
and I have recorded this chapter for the reason that, when masters find a strange thing, they may know how to help.
how to bring the bone back into its place
Here after comes the form of the clamp, as we have found in the books; and to two turns at two joints of the two limbs. Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle of the restrictor, and be made of ebony or boxwood;
and let the mouth of the tube be i.e. two finger widths wide, and the edge of the trees i.e. must, and long one palm and a half; and among the two i.e. limbs be two fastenings of this same tube, which are fastened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more;
and these two fastenings are put in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers; and has two shoulders two joints, as you see, of one palm long, and two fingers wide;
and when you see to open the vagina with all the instruments, so make the woman sit on one bed, the feet apart and the legs open, then put the two instruments joined together in the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument below between her hips; then work your hand with all the instrument, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the vagina, until the patient does what she wants.
This instrument is all surmounted, and are multiplied their likenesses; and when the eyes have appeared them, so much it is more hasty the work, and higher to men for their quantity.
If you do not despise the instrument that you do not have appeared it, because their necessities are not excusable.
When the secondine is retained at childbirth, then it behooves you to command the woman that she retain her breath, and then make her sneeze of condiment, and restrain her hands to the mouth and nose; and if she leaps through this, well is it.
If this does not work, take one pot and make a hole or lid in it, and put herbs in it that can open the mouth of the marsh, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialgine, and centaury.
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked or put in water over the fire; then put one end of a rope or perforated pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marsh.
And steam it until the vapors come from within the marsh; then make it sneeze as we have said. If the second part jumps hastily. And if it remains after this cure and is not better, as you command the nurse to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in a poultice of alum, and then puts it in the wound.
and grasps the second bone; and when she has found it, she seizes it and extends it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not fall out during extraction. but it must be moved gently to and fro, and then pulled; so it will come out and disengage.
And if the mouth of the marrow is tight, we have said the cure of sneezing and fumigation of herbs;
and if it is not of all that we have said, so guard that you do not use for milking;
but it is necessary that the one that is at the mouth of the mare, you tie it to the hip of the woman, then enema it with ointment tetra pharmacon;
if she will bear and put it back in, and come forward; but nonetheless, when she bears it if there comes bad smell to the stomach and head, and makes the patient pale.
So it is necessary then fumigations suitable to this: none of the ancients have experienced fumigation of cress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument which one uses to fumigate the woman at childbirth retention is this:
And it is like a cage in appearance, and one puts the subtle head inside the body, and the wide shoulders above the fire;
and let the fumigation be over the embers, and the rag as long as it is smoked, and begin another one.
To examine the foundation
Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but it is stopped by subtle things. Therefore it befits the midwife that she pierce that thing at its proper place, and do not pierce it with sharp instrument, and guard the incision so that she does not touch it.
Then put upon it a cloth moistened in wine and oil, then cure with ointment until it is healed.
And if you doubt that it will not stop, then put in the opening a piece of lead, and let him lay still for a day, and remove it when the child wants to go into chambers.
And sometimes this numbness comes from the closing of a wound or abscess; so it is necessary to cover that closure; if it is cured, as we have said about the cautery of lead.
of the fistula of the foundation Fistulas that come from below the foundation are knotted, and larger than those that come from near the outer foundation, or in the space of the two parts,
If there is one fistula or more; and when that knotting is old, it works, and still damp moisture white or subtle bows,
And at times these fistulas are present; and they are known by those who have them either by discharge or windiness when the patient defecates, and by chance sometimes one jumps out.
And if fistulas that reach to the bladder and halfway up the penis; and extend to the groin joint, and to the buttock.
And thus one knows the fistula that is penetrating at the foundation, and not penetrating: and that you place your two index fingers or foundation, and insert a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when it has no twisting.
And if it has twisting, put there a tent of fine lead or one hair of horse, as long as you feel the tent or the hair at your finger;
and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out of the opening or by windiness or hernia, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; so hasten to cure it.
And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or up to the urinary tract, then urine leaks out and cannot be stopped by medicines.
If it is pierced to the juncture of the hip, then the tendon comes to its place. If there is no twisting and the pain is in the surrounding area, then it is that it has bowed inward, and it does not merit medicine nor treatment by ointment.
And in these Persian fistulas there is no cure but labor, and vanity of the foolish remedies that intervene.
In those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced.
and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his hips, and let his hips be inclined to his belly; then put a tent of iron, or of lead if there is twisting, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels it around the base, then it is necessary that you put your index finger there;
and if you feel that the tent has pierced it; and whether it is uncovered or you feel between your finger the sinew or the flesh, then you know it is pierced; if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
It is said, however, that one can well heal none of them, but this rarely happens;
and the help one gives them, if one carefully applies the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been said before; and it completely bakes the fistula, as far as it reaches the base; and do this 2 or 3 times, as long as you know that these charcoal-like growths are burned, which resemble the quill of an eye;
and then the cure of wets tents in butter, as long as that char is wet, then the cure of ointment binding flesh and joining.
If it is thus healed, it is well. If not, it cannot be healed otherwise;
and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the bottom which is the foundation, and there is between your bottom and the tent a thick covering of flesh or fascia, and you see the fistula at this which follows the covering of the heart; if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and push forward before the tent, and then cauterize afterward, as far as it comes to the head of the tent;
And will be delivered the tent, and will fall; then define those charted ones that seem a feather of bird, and nothing remains.
And if the sans [meaning unclear] vaints, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the cautery of fire assembles two good things: that is to say, the burning of those joined charted ones, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
then the cure with tents moistened in butter or in ground herbs, as long as the wound is bowed [meaning concave], and the charted ones are burned in the bottom;
Then treat the wound of the eyelids by applying hard dried flesh, and are the medicines dry.
For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not return.
And if a fistula comes just to the bottom of the base, and is removed from the body, then you put on your own skin or foundation, and inquire about this.
If you feel the tent, and between two and three is the cloth or silk or skin, or it is near to piercing, then there is only a way of trust and hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and cure as before.
and do not go too deep in cutting, that you do not cut the tenement which holds the foundation, and let the evacuations come by the natural way. then cure it, as we have said.
then cure it, as we have said. by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the wound after it is cut close to the foundation, or by tent or another pointed instrument; Then make up the flesh that is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the foundation; so it is lighter for the patient.
And sometimes fistulas are like this: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is or lies against the foundation near the skin above, if you take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And he puts one twisted thread into two, and puts the tent to all the thread in the fistula until it is at the head.
If it is pierced in the margin of the base inside, then extract the thread from that one pierced, just as you put your doe or foundation.
And treat the head of the thread, and assemble the two heads together, and restrain one to another, and let it be for one or two days;
And restrain it no more times, until the threads close these gaps that are between two, and they stick together.
then heal the wound until it is joined and healed.
If the fistula does not pierce, make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
For it does not behoove to make a lance for the fistula if it is too deeply embedded, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the spatula used for making a fistula should be very smooth and one-edged; and on the other hand no, for those that one does not cut, those that one should not cut, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are according to 2 manners: or they are within the foundation, as much as grains of resin, and there are small and large, and in short they bleed. and there are one or more, and they are outside the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are outside have little moisture,
and moreover there or a drop of clear water or a drop of blood, and have the color of the body
and the cure of those who have them within the foundation, if it is that you command the patient to stretch for air in chambers, as long as the foundations are inflamed and the threads appear if you hurry, and can grasp it with forceps, or you hold it with your finger, then cut it at its roots
and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with one drapery, or with cotton, or from a piece of felt and hold them with your two hands, then cut them, and put some hot powder on the place of cautery. and cauterize them as it is said in the chapter of cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
and if the base cannot be discharged, then have the patient take a harsh and biting enema to wash what is at the base so that it can come out clearly.
And if the patient does not complain and if the thread is loose from the base, then the treatment is light; And it is that you prick them with your finger or tongs, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and he fears the incision by iron.
It is fitting that you administer the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread and put it in a needle, then pull the thread upwards and make the needle pierce through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle. and if it is too wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave one for correcting the superfluity of blood;
then place on the foundation one piece of cloth moistened in rose oil or cerate, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
and then let it rest until they heal, and when they are healed, treat them with ointment and other treatment until they are sound.
of the drying of the veins or foundation Many times there is a drying of the veins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine does not avail.
Then you should scrape it at the point of a spatula or with your fingernail, leaving it to dry. then the cure as long as he is healed as it is fitting.
and if he cannot heal, then the scraping begins again stronger than before, until it heals well, and is scraped. then the cure as long as it is healed.
for trembling Ant is a small appearance fashioned before the body, and goes much deep.
And at times it finds him cold, and feels one as dead from fright, and comes throughout the body, and more to the hands than elsewhere.
And the cure is that you take a rod of goose feather, or a raven's feather strong, and put that rod on the fright, until the circles redden the fright all around. Then turn your hand on all the rod until you scrape all around the fright, and put it deep, and pull out the fright from its roots.
And if you see, do this of a hound of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle below and trailing above:
do not pierce it, but to keep at the two, and move pressing And if you see, so cauterize the groove, as it is before or chapter of cautery.
of the form of the clister No time is made clister of silver or brass, or iron melted or meshed; and no time is made of these instruments small and great, according to those to whom they are administered.
Therefore those which one administers in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
The form of the clyster small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
and there is an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head is inside pierced; and on one side two holes, and on the other one;
and is the belly where one puts the medicines of a bladder of beast or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes,
And between each opening one must put a distance, then put in each opening one strong thread of twisted thread in ten or more, and assemble the belly as if it were a ram; And when the medicine is inside, the patient holds the instrument before with a strong thread, then administer a clyster; and this is the form of the circle;
And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then put it in gently;
then the minister compresses it with his two hands together, until it is all full, then withdraw the clyster, and raise the patient's legs to the side;
and if the medicine wants to issue, so let it sleep as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night entirely, it is greater help.
And if you enema him with the sickness of a falling belly, and the medicine hastens to issue, so restart it until it is cured.
And if the hemorrhoids are at their base, or an abscess, so be the enema as subtle as for one child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
of wounds
We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and of medicine, according to the accomplishment.
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
The things by which wounds are made are by blows of stone, and cutting of sword and knife, or spear or club or arrow, or similar things;
or which are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members
and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the wounds of the head simple, because remembrance will come in its chapter.
I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if one takes care if it is from a stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt greatly of abscess hot: if the one makes it to bleed from the cephalic itself even if it comes little blood from the wound, and be the bleeding on the contrary of the sunken part;
and avoid the patient overindulgence of wine and fatty meats.
And if he does not wish to heal, then let him moderate his meat and drink no wine nor eat any meat.
and put on the wound, if an abscess comes there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in wine stich.
and if there is no abscess hot, then put on the wound, if it is fresh to all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will say a little after.
And if he has moved the arm, put on some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together with tents, then bring them together with sutures, just as I shall say for wounds of the belly, by suturing.
If the wound is exposed bone, and hangs, and holds only by one piece, then cut it away. Then cure the wound with medicine, and restore tough flesh in its place of skin And instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as beef and wheat cooked, also poultry, and similar things.
And if you find yourself with rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, so cut away all the rot, and throw it away, then cure.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then seize the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread; And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light: and it is that you put in this powder which binds as soon as the wound has closed.
And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; quicklime three parts, and grind the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and hold it in place firmly, until it dries well and joins together with all its blood.
and then cover it well, and leave it without unbinding it, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
And at no time should one make this with only quicklime when they lack incense or dragon's blood, but that the fire has not moved the wound.
And if the art has moved the wound, even in this state, do not put any of this powder there.
But put on some ointment made from boiled herbs, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it is moist. Then care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
and I will tell you here afterwards about the fractures of the head.
of the wound of the neck
This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if it has no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or artery is cut.
If it is the nerve, there is nothing else to do but leave it to heal, and put nothing restraining on it, because it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put on the wound anything cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the highest member.
but let it be the medicine sweet, as warm water washed and mixed with rose oil, and cooked water also in sweet water and other stones of mine according to this manner, and moistened ointments.
And if the wound is large, so stitch it and bind it with bandages, then care for it until it is healed.
And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, then pierce or lower than that.
And if the artery is cut, and there comes a flow of blood, then stop it, and close it up, and cauterize it if that is necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduit is kept, because that is where the meat goes. So cut the heart above the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural shape. and then the restraint is applied, and it is left for some days, then it is treated with ointment dressings until it is healed.
and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then so be it; and if there are fragments of bone, then treat them all as best you can, and those that you cannot have, leave them until the wound heals. and let it be cleansed and aligned the opening;
and if the wound is fresh, put powder on top of the powder I have mentioned. And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I said in my chapter.
of a lance or knife wound
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look at whether from the wound there are windinesses as the patient breathes; you know then that the wound is mortal;
and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, do not put any powder to it in the first hour, nor bind it so that the blood does not stay within. and return to the heart, and comfort the patient; but I put attractive ointment, and bind it 2 times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; if there comes no spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor dragging of the arm; and when you see the good arrangements, then you know that the wound is saved. Treat it then with bandages and other dressings, as long as it heals;
and if it cannot heal and work, know that there is a fistula; so treat it as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, treat it as that which is before.
If it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, use powder; and if it is deep into the bone and has broken pieces, then treat the wound and the fractured bones if they are severed; and if they are not severed, let the wound rot, so that it will ease extractions.
and for other wounds as other members is the judgment as we have said.
the displacement of the belly
The displacement of the belly is great and medium and small;
of the great wound sometimes the intestine or the nerve of the intestines jumps out, by which the intrusion of others;
and the suture is more troublesome, and sometimes worse the small wound than the large.
for this reason one puts back the intestines in, only if they are put back hot and cold; because the intestines swell as soon as they feel the cold, so they go back in more difficultly,
and for this reason the small wound is worse, for this reason one resets the intestine to its place more than others two;
And know that a rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
The two common sutures occur in the suture of the belly,
and the sutures of other wounds of the body and two other special sutures are common to other wounds;
and nonetheless they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine has come out and if it needs to be closed, then it is done by one of the two ways: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: soak a sponge or a soft cloth in tepid water only, or you cook it in water,  squinting and cypress and spice, and raise the intestines until the swelling is removed;
and sometimes this makes it tight, and it moves just a little bit to loosen.
And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or wine and let them be cooked. for by these is aligned the entrance to a little thing;
and if it cannot enter, then make a hole in the wound with the instrument with which one treats hemorrhoids;
and the first cure is to move the waist that we should not cut into it without great necessity
and this is the instrument for splitting it:
if it's cut inward at the curve and outward not, and see here the form:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine jumps out if you put it back in according to its natural shape in its proper place, if you are able, because this is important.
When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, If it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back. and put his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly,
and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts if you put your attention to that the sunken part be higher than the other;
and thus it is fitting to administer what I say in large and small wounds.
For small wounds apply that which has appeared to you,
Then place in your hands one minister piteous that holds all the fracture with his hand and assembles the lips; and this is the common manner of stitching,
and this is the common manner of stitching, and that you pierce a needle or more, according to the quantity and width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound 1. that is, a space, and there insert a needle where it has 1. good strong thread; and pierce the 2. heads of the skin with the 2. heads of the shaft,
then the strain of a double thread wrapped around the needle of 2 parts, then assemble the 2 heads of the wound evenly,
and then leave 1/2 a space, and insert another needle; then tie the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not cease from doing this according to what you need of needles, until all the wound is restrained;
and let the needles be medium-sized, between fine and coarse, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and the too coarse ones cannot enter well: for this reason they must be shortened
and it is not proper to put the needles too far from the flesh and skin
so that they do not cut and open the wound before the suture
and then cut the needles so that they don't prick the patient while sleeping, and I place tents or drapes on the shoulder of the needles to keep them from moving and let them stay until the wound is closed;
and this manner of suturing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, for one needle or two are sufficient
The second suture is common, and it is that you assemble the two cheeks of the skin and the two cheeks of the fascia together with a needle on which there is one strong medium thread; and when you will have pierced these four cheeks together,
and when you will have pierced these four cheeks together, then you shall pull the needle to the part where you began, in the manner on which one sews the garments;
and put space between each stitch the thickness of a man's finger.
This stitch is suited for a man,
and I sew a wound that one had in his abdomen,
which was mangled by a knife, and was the wound more than a palm wide. And it was of intestines well two palms wide.
And the wound was in the middle of the belly. I brought back the intestine after it had been  24 hours.
and the wound was sutured up to the 15th day, and it healed, and it was cured.
And the healers thought he would die, and this was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with ointment, because I was in one place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and I put half a finger more on the wound with old cotton twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it was cured.
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of suturing:
Take the needle and push it from the outside part to the inside.
When it pierces the flesh right through, lead it with your thumb or where you inserted the needle.
and make it pierce from the other side from the inside to the outside;
and the understanding of this stitching is that you stitch as the furrier does furs and that you leave once the thread on one side, and take it back on the other, as long as the stitching is entirely completed.
The second manner of stitching, which Galen says properly,
is like that which some make, who join together the two parts naturally. and apply one of the heads to the other head, in such a manner:
Insert a needle or head of a mirach close by, and make him feel it only, and leave the two heads of the syfac; then turn the needle, and make him feel it from the outside part to the inside, as the two shoulders
then make one feel each of the outer part until that inside, in two other shoulders of the miracle that are on the other side;
and this is the most common way to suture and the most usual.
The Galicians say this word, and no one testifies it
one must sew the belly with two needles, or there is thread in each
and one must push one needle on one side, and the other on the other, in the manner of those who sew ropes;
and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, it is the stitching more grievous than other places of the belly.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, just as the flesh has been moved, then put the intestine back in and stitch it together, then put powder on it that will heal flesh
then put the intestine back in and stitch it together, then put powder on it that will heal flesh and if the flesh has been moved, then put some ointment on top of it, as long as the wound heals. and sew the thread, and be joined the fascia, and the membrane. then cure the wound as the others, until it is healed;
and if you lack medicines, put upon it, as soon as it begins to fester, old cloth, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need another medicine in many cases than when wounds are simple.
and if you doubt that the wound does not make community with principal members. then it is proper that you moisten the linen lightly in oil of thyme, or rose oil, and place it around the angles and under the buttocks.
and if he feels pain or rot in his bowels, and it happens many times. if black wine enemas are given, and similarly if the rot comes as far as the intestine;
and it is pierced inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
The intestine that is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is rotting, and it is for the placement of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back in as quickly as the intestine, while it is fresh;
and if it is old and has turned to a worm or black, then you must tie the place that is black, so that blood doesn't flow from there. for there are veins and arteries there;
then cut what is between the ligament and put the two heads hanging from the part below the wound up to outward in order to align the extraction when the bone falls and the wound bows.
of the rupture of the boil
When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, if it can, restore in some men,
for that I see that one man was pierced in the belly of a lance;
and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and from it there were excrement and flatulence;
I made the cure according to what I could, and did not cease to work until it was healed, and the bones joined together.
And when I saw it join together, I feared that the patient had badly in his belly; and there was no ill, but he remained in better dispositions, and ate and drank;
And they said any experimentors that when he had a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in this manner: Take fresh threads with large needles, then assemble the lips of the wound And when the thread has covered the mouth, place it upon the two lips,
then put one other fragment after it in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered
and close the wound. That chief if it burns in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
and if one can bind the intestine with a fine thread which is cut from the intestine of an animal,
in such manner: take the head of this intestine thread that is very bare, and then tie to the head of this thread i.e., a thread of fine linen twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and wind it in the opening;
and this manner of stitching of remedies is not outside according to the way of hope and expectancy;
and if the wound is great and wide, even when it is in one of the inner bowels, there is nothing but subtlety.
of fistula or wherever it may be Know that every wound or abscess, when it opens, is universally called "fistula", and also when it is pulled back and bent.
And a fistula is according to the truth a hardened, white knot, where one does not feel pain, and it is also pulled back like the feather of a bird;
and sometimes in its clarity it is bent, and other times thick; Sometimes much, and sometimes enough.
and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only due to one of the 8 causes:
namely, by the smallness of blood or flesh; or for its wickedness; or because there is hard flesh inside it, and on the lips, that does not allow flesh to be born; where there is too much swelling; or the material is spoiled, and the quality is bad; when the medicine is not good in the cure or because corruption is a manner of pestilence; or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and slow in healing, and inflated by nature; or where there are veins or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
And it is necessary that I make you know the cure of fistula which is done by the work of hands.
Know that a fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
And all the fistulas that are this way are of grievous healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place that I have said, and you have faith in the cure, and you see it known, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, if curved.
and if the fistula is twisted, then surround it with a subtle tent of wool. for wool can be molded to follow its twisting shape;
and if the fistula is open by hand and you cannot well cover it with tents, then cleanse it by one of its openings,
for the moisture passes from one opening to another, and cleanses it;
then carefully probe it with your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and whether it is closed up properly,
and ask well the patient of the pain that he feels at the pressing of your hand, and the place where he feels it;
and when you will know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, if the blow according to what I have told you,
or in any of the places that I have told you, if the blow according to what I have told you, and bone being the cause and the characts corrupted that are within; and then the treatment until it is healed,
and if the fistula is deep and straight, then you should cut it deeper, as much as you can, then put soaked tents in a hot poultice, and push them to the top of the fistula,
then put soaked tents in a hot poultice, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medication corrodes the superfluity that is lodged at the bottom;
And then he places ointment for healing flesh, as long as it is healthy.
And if it is not healthy by this means, then cauterize it as we have said.
And if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it out. If a vein or nerve grazes or touches principal limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, so wash it as long as the corruption is all removed then treat it with things that heal flesh until it is healed.
and if it doesn't heal and returns bent like before, know that you have not gone far enough.
if uncovered and want as long as you are at the bottom and remove all the corruption, then restore its place;
and if it is thus healed, it is well. If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot reach it; If there is no other means than to let nature have its way;
And if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with pliers, if the extraction is done with an instrument suitable for this purpose,
and if there are many bones,  extract them all thoroughly, leaving none behind.
and if the moisture opposes you, and there is no error or fear, if it copes with moisture and flesh, and delivers the bones.
And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something preventing rotting, and let it remain until the flesh rots around the bones,
and therefore they will have more easily the bones;
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, if you remove only the corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound;
and if there is a great part of corruption, and comes to the flesh of the bone. if it must be cut and covered all until the corruption, and then treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you of a fistula that happened to one man in his leg. so that you may take it as an example and help with your work.
There was one youth about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
as long as the materials came to the leg, and was swollen with a large abscess, and had no outer cause to open;
but the physicians by their folly operated so much that the abscess opened, and they removed much of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came much pus that all was flowing out, wet and from the body;
and many a while they care for  two years, and there is no sage in the art of hands,
until that I came to be called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him, and those who were being treated through the punctures of great body parts. and the body of the young man was becoming red, and it had a citron color.
I put a tent in one of these holes, and then I searched all the holes.
and found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
I then leaned in, and poked into one of the holes until I discovered part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the inside bone;
I was that one who showed me of the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was not another corruption, except for that which I removed;
and began to restore the wound with medications of softening by long time, and could not join (or heal);
and then I recommenced, and uncovered the bone as before,
and found the corruption continued in the bone, and I removed it, and then took it out, and I lamented that I could not join (or heal) the place;
but I could no more than I coped to one palm of the bone, and the traitor was to all its flesh. then I restored him with medicines; and he became healed and well quickly,
and it was no longer necessary to begin the work except for the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure, and because of the fear of death that I had of him. Because for the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed completely.
Because for the evacuation of blood often, but he was healed completely. and in the place of the bone there grew a hard flesh, and he was of good disposition and had no annoyance or contrary at all, neither in going nor coming.
and stretch the head so that you draw the corrupted flesh down. and uncover the flesh in the place where you see to be, so that the skin does not cover the flesh. and place one splint or a board under the bone so as to cover the corrupted flesh And it is necessary to be as careful as one can see and feel the corruption, and to be still another time.
And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open at all, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the flesh completely; then place one splint under,
and then be from one part to the other the corruption, and be the suture of the long corruption i.e. point, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, so cut the corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it contains from the other side;
and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is nothing else to be cut;
and if the corruption is in the finger of the hand, or in the finger of the foot, then this thing is very strong; but nonetheless it is necessary that you inquire about that corrosion, how it opens to you and purify it in every way that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you;
and know that the instruments and threads for covering these bones are many, according to the setting of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to prepare for each kind of operation its instrument.
And know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the ways of diseases. So consider the instrument which you need according to what is fitting.
of fire The shoulder can come out due to inside or outside causes;
and when you have treated that corrosion with the cure of medicines, and they are of no use, then it is necessary to cover that limb until the place where the corrosion comes from, if the patient escapes by these from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb;
if the patient escapes by these from death, or by the malice, which is greater, of the fault of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and afterwards the blackness, then goes that corrosion of limb to limb, and takes over the whole body; if you hurry about the cover,
and if it is from the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and viper and similar.
if the corrosion is at the top of the back, if it [is] covered, and do not let him have any space to come as far as the hand.
And if it comes as far as the hand, cover it at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come as far as the arm;
and if it comes to the arm, cover it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death. and does not merit treatment other than the quantity of its virtue;
And so do this when the corrosion comes or where it hurts: if it comes in the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
and if it comes where it hurts, cut all of the pain; and if it rises in the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to leave the patient to die;
and the manner of cutting or sewing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one minister to the lower ligament, and another minister to the upper ligament, and you shall cut away the flesh that is between the two ligaments one span wide, until the bone be uncovered;
Then cover or clothe it, and put on each side one sheet of linen, so that the sore does not touch the healthy place. And may another lesion and abscess come to the patient.
And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the place thoroughly, or you put on any restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
then bind the limb hurt with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
and I will tell you that it happened to one man in his foot:
he had a blackness that seemed burned by fire,
and that corrosion first came in his heel of the foot, until it spread throughout the whole foot;
And when the man saw the corrosion, he tried to cover his foot, and was healed.
And long afterwards it returned, the corrosion in his hand, and he came to me
and I put on him things which are pounced upon after the purification of the body, and cannot cease the corrosion.
and he begged that I would cut off his hand, and I refused, because I had hope of counteracting the matter; And also beware if he cuts his hand, that he does not die. For the virtue of man was weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land. And took it upon himself to cover his hand, and became healed.
And I have recounted this tale for no other reason than so that one can do otherwise if they need to.
Sometimes an abscess comes to a head, and it lasts so long that it creates great swelling. and then breaks open and bursts, and the swelling goes out, and the place remains as though it were a vessel. And the skin that is on top is as thin as one fine linen cloth and does not reach down to the bone or to the nerve, and such a sickness is called "healthy."
but if it is so lengthened that it comes as far as the bone, then it is called “fistula”;
and the cure of this is that you cut that skin all around, and also when it is thinned out, just like a piece of cloth; and it does not get worse for its corruption.
And if you have faith that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema like this:
Look if the breasts are large, and the bowel inside smells foul. then administer a clyster made with Egyptian medicine, which is prepared as follows: Take thus, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire. Until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
and then take of this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and in clysters the rectum, and restrain the protrusion; and let the medicine rest for 2 hours, then remove it by squeezing.
do this many times, until the chest is defined, and the fear is removed.
and no time is a clysterized of ashes water, when this medicine isn't present, and it is that you gather ashes from vine wood, and pour water above
Then the flow, and in a clyster, until you know that the breasts are well moistened.
and if the patient cannot bear it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clyster them with water and honey where there is a pinch of litharge ground. or you may clyster them with honey and mellowed wine, for honey has the property of purifying and cleansing, and the wine makes the flesh hard;
and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breast is well cleansed, if the enema of those that make flesh grow in it,
and you apply a plaster of this kind, and it is made with rose oil and wine; or you clysterize him with certain medicines and unguents, of which I have said the properties or treat the unguents
and if the opening of the chest is small, and the cannula of the clyster cannot enter it, then widen it with iron a little, and place inside a tent of Egyptian ointment, or ointment basilum, until it is widened;
And if the wound is too wide, sew it so that only the place where the clyster may enter remains open.
And if the opening which is above is gaping, close it or stitch it lower down where it is. For when the wound is in good repair, do not let any flesh be drawn in; And if you cannot close the opening below as you see fit, If it is prepared in such a way that the bowel goes to the lowest place it exists.
and if you cannot cover the breast as you wish. If it is prepared in such a way: that the bowel goes gently down, and nothing from the bowel remains; and take consolidating medicines to put on the chest
and extend it over that is a linen sheet that covers the entire chest; then wrap with forces in place the opening of the chest that is one palm wider than the first, then extend ointment over another sheet according to the quantity of the opening, and place it on the opening of the chest to align the rib, and do not remove the large cloth outside except after many days once.
And he who is outside the opening of the chest, often remove to remove the rib. And know what comes from the rib, if it is venom or pus or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
and take ward if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not,
and when your medicine has been spread in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps over the wound of the chest, if you know that the breast is healed already, and approach the healthy ones;
and then untie it in the morning, or every third day, and when you untie the wound, if you change one other bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breast lies bowed indigestion after many days, know that the breast does not heal well. And if subtle venoms cut after a long time, so do not despair of health,
for health approaches. For there are men whose healing is slow in their wounds, and some who do the opposite;
and if a breast lies bowed indigestion after many days, know that the breast does not heal well;
and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are swollen, apply drying medicines moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment of diaphana, because it contains a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
take diaphana ointment, and make it with rose oil, and the essence of old wine equal in substance;
then pour it and use it; and those same made honey cooked mixed, when inflammation has defined
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey when it is over the fire; and then you glue it onto a cloth, and put it on the chest, and every time one administers a long licorice stick and roots of the lily of heaven, which is also like flour of violets and centaury.
and roots of the lily of heaven, which is also like flour of violets and centaury. and in using simple or compound remedies: grind them up and make a powder from it, and place it on the honey that I have said, and use it. and if the wound is elongated, and isn't healed by this treatment
and if the wound is elongated, and isn't healed by this treatment then know that corruption has entered deeply, and makes an impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs. if the wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
of the abscess of the ankle
Panace is an abscess that arises beneath the ankle of the hand, or in the foot, or perhaps arises in other places;
and when it is neglected and care is not taken, then comes one abscess after another, and they dig and set the bone until it reaches the root of the joint, and perhaps they break it completely.
and the corrosion comes to the bone, until there is pain and suppuration, and the joint is loose, and the color is livid.
When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all. then you must cut away all the superfluity that is hanging from the joint Then cauterize the wound after. The cautery is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the joint is healthy;
and if the joint adheres to the flesh, and it begins to prick, and the skin then it is necessary that you put a rag under the joint where it pricks the flesh And the end on top, and cut this flesh subtly and lightly. And put on top the remaining flesh with medicines burning and corrosive to remove all of it;
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it out and treat it, because as long as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal.
And if you see the two bones to be corrupted, cut it in one of them as it has been said before. then treat it until it is healed;
and if it is broken and bruised, and it causes great pain, then you must first heal it. then cut the angle with a spatula by cutting crosswise on top,
and guard that the blade does not come near the flesh that is below the angle, because the patient would feel too much pain
And if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
The two joints that are born in some men's hands by chance are all fleshy. And by chance there is some where there are bones, and sometimes there is a nail,
And none of these grow at the root of the joint, where the birth is in no one's two. He who is born in neither one of the two does not move, And he who is born at the joint of the two, by chance moves;
The waist of the one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner: Cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Whoever is born at the root of the joint, he is difficult to cure; so you must be careful when cutting it.
In one who is born or is at the end of his buttock, you should first cut away the rounded flesh up to the bone, Then set the bone to a suitable silk, then treat it until it is healed.
The bandages that come to two together come by birth, or by soldering of a wound, or by burn of fire, or by similar things.
If it is fitting that you set that suture, so that the parts repay according to their natural forms; then put between two tents or cloths softened in rose oil, so that they do not adhere. and you put between two pieces of subtle splint, until the bones are joined, as it is fitting.
The joining comes to none of his two with the palm, if he copes that joining as it is fitting.
Of evils
Vices are veins large and full of melancholic superfluities, that come in more than one member of the body;
and more often happens in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Therefore it is necessary that you administer to him once purging of colocynth, and then the healing of the basilica.
The cure of iron is thus in two ways: one is with the cup and drawing out black blood; and the other manner is that you open the vein and draw all of it out.
The waist is thus treated in this manner: first raise the leg of hot water very much, until the thick flesh is softened. then pull the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the knee. then cut the vein in one place, or in two, or in three, of a wide size.
then remove and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much flesh as the virtue of the patient can bear.
and then the wound, and instruct him to apply a poultice of black ointment;
and restart the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
The elevation of the leg is done this way: raise the leg of the patient, if there are many hairs then put it in a bath, and raise the leg from hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
and if you have no bath, heat it by the fire, and then cut the place of the vein long from the arm to the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
then work the skin with the scalpel, and scrape the vein on each side until it appears when touched;
and you will see it red and black, and when it enters the skin it appears like a white rope;
then push the point below, until it is lifted from the skin, and then cut it lightly with the scalpel,
then the cut in one other place above three fingers; then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it to the root, as you have done, and put it in another needle, as you did first;
then cut another piece, or more if you need it, then lift and cut at the two points of the foot,
then pull and lift until the second piece; then extract piece by piece until it is completely free, then cut;
and if you cannot draw it out and lift it, put a needle at its end to a strong doubled thread and tie it and pull it out, and put beneath it one weight, and turn your hand from one side and the other, as long as it comes out and keep that it does not break, for if it breaks, then one cannot draw it out nor lift it, and it brings annoyance to the patient;
and when you have drawn it all out, put on the wound's place wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
And if the bone is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said. if it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
if it is necessary that you split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before. The shape of the iron with which one covers the bone is curved, and does not cut, so that it does not cover the vein.
and is of thick curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cover the vein, but be gross as we have said, and here is the shape:
Of the civil vein
This vein is found in legs, in warm parts where there do not grow herbs nor trees, and in land where there is no moisture;
and by chance it may be found elsewhere than in legs, and this happens because of the rotting that comes from beneath the skin,
as it comes from within the body of serpents and worms, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then it changes its color, and the vein begins to emerge, as if the root of a plant.
When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of plank from one and a half to two fingers in width, and tie it
and leave the plank on the leg, and every time that it feels any pain in the outside part, wrap it again around the plank, and tie it. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining portion, and do not cut it at its root, until it is completely grown. For if you cut it, it will return into the flesh, and bring an abscess and putrefaction there, and a bad illness.
Therefore for that reason it is necessary that it be treated carefully and bit by bit until the head, and nothing of it remain in the body.
And sometimes this vein when it is treated is five palms long, or ten. and one man came to me once, whose arm was out 10 palms long, and when you cut it, it shoots 1  arrow or more, and pierces it to the bottom,
so that all is out; and it should be emptied the matter which is inside, and administer to its place medicines preventing corruption any day, then cure it like the abscesses.
And at times to this vein hands reins, and also when it opens in the joint of the foot, or foot, and there comes out much blood, and from which it jumps reins; cure therefore as we have said before.
Of worms that are born between skin and flesh
This sickness is called in our land "ox disease" because it happens many times to oxen,
and is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body going up and down and one feels it well at the change of limb to limb, as long as it breaks through the skin where it goes and leaps out;
and it is caused by rot from certain humors, such as worms and lice and ascarids in the belly.
and one doubts its malice, because when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head and comes to the eye. by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
When you see it being cured and milked, there is no escape but when it goes away:
So then it is necessary that you tie the place above and below with a strong ligature very tightly.
Then cut above it and bring out the cord, and if the nerve is caught in the flesh, and you do not find it. then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
And the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the eye, then restrain below it the eyebrow forming, then cut above, and the track further.
and it is necessary to use the patient of purification of body of medicinal solutions for the bad humors corrupted,
and if there are sores from rotting meats.
Of the pain that comes from windiness This sickness is called "vakir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in certain limbs, and then it moves from limb to limb; and I have seen what I tell you.
I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
and just a little after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, more quickly than anything, just like living silver when it is cut from its place;
the pain departs from that spot and goes into the shoulder,
and then a little later it spreads throughout the body until it comes to the other arm;
then she told me that it returned again around her body, as I saw it.
I was amazed greatly how she moved so from limb to limb, because I have never seen this sickness in this manner. However, I have seen many who well had the pain move from one place to another, but I have never seen it like this, as I see in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and uncovered veins, and for this appears that constrained windiness;
and they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate and who have moist bodies and full veins.
And when you see curing this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, if the lump above and below is evenly spread out, and then cut on top until that constrained windiness at the place has gone away; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
if the care of those who expel the wind, such as pills of viper and pills of serpent, and similar ones.
Of arrows
Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places in the body where they lodge.
The diversity of them is that some have large points, and small ones, and hairy, and smooth. and of those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces. And those that fall in any member fall in two ways: or in the principal member it falls,
such as brain, heart, liver, lung, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When she falls therefore in any place of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear to you: if it is necessary that you take care in the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after in many cases. and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and care for the wound.
And the sign of the brain when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and leaps the soft tissue which is above the brain, is when eye scotomata and soddenness and eversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of phlegm. and perhaps this without force from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps loses speech and voice; and jump from the wound moisture white seeming to boils, and in jump also as burnt of flesh;
and if this sign appear to you, then hold from the cure, and treat the arrow if it is not in.
The sign of the seventh when it falls or heart, is that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty. And by chance the seventh moves as the arm, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting. Therefore know without doubt that death approaches.
And the sign of the saette that never moves is that without plains of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
And if the arrow falls into the covering of the hip, it is near the ribs; and throws great pain and great sorrow and sighing; and moves all the members from the shoulders.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perchance it leaps out of the wound something undigested flesh.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and leaps out no point of straw through the gut path, there is no hope in the cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine leaks out and comes outside, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
The other members, such as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spine of the back and ribs and hips and legs, and the similar members, are saved according to more dispositions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you that it happened to me, for that reason that you would do otherwise.
It happened to one man with an arrow in the root of the nose: I tried it, and drew it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and he was healed without feeling anything at all.
And throw it to a game an arrow that fell in the fat of the eye under the paper down, and the arrow was stuck, and could not reach except its point towards the shaft. and it was the arrow great as an archer's, with all i. one light iron without ears; the game was unharmed and did not suffer any ill happening.
And throw an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow with ears:
I was the beards, and I skillfully led it until I betrayed it, and it was healed for the Christians.
And I betrayed an arrow in one man, that it was in his chest or belly, and I thought he would die;
and then when he had passed thirty days, he did not change his condition; I cut on the arrow, and I loosened it, and I betrayed it further, and there was no bad accident.
And if you see a man to whom an arrow fell or back, and the wound was sewn up;
and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural position, nor finds any pain in any of his natural works.
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sewn up;
and stay thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
And treat an arrow in the king of lords'  a man, that was lodged in-between his ribs. and was slightly reclining towards the right side; and the arrow was completely embedded
I was summoned to treat him after it had lodged for three days. I found the wound very narrow.
I felt it with all of a subtle tent, and did not feel it at all. And he felt tingling and pain below his right ear. I thought that it was from the tip of the arrow
I put on the spot a lead plaster digestive, because the  area did not swell; and appeared to me the joints of the arrow.
and appeared to me the joints of the arrow. I put the plaster on immediately that day, and sutured the wound directly, and kept the patient there a long time.
until he felt the arrow i.e. one day within his flesh; and he told me this. I put on the wound a corrosive medicine by hand immediately, for as long as it was open,
and try it, and feel the head of the arrow which is straightening in place. then adjust it in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
and it pierced well the ends for .iiij. months,
and then I enlarged the wound so that I put it in the pliers, and mine on one side and the other, and it could not come out;
Therefore, do not cease to tinker and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day well-made pliers. according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I treated it, and restored the wound.
And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it, therefore, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was healed completely.
Or you have been told the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you put your cure on those which I do not say, because the books cannot take everything in;
but the wise masters compare well to a very small thing, and on those which are present and lacking, find new works, and nine instruments, at the descending of strange things that happen in this art.
I say that arrows are not from the limbs where they are fixed except according to two manners: or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
and those that go beyond where they enter, are arrows that enter into the flesh, and do not come out at any time now.
And if it does not come out now, let it remain as long as the flesh is sore around it, and ease the exit;
and also if it is lodged in the bone, and it cannot come out, then leave it as such for several days, and moisten it each day;
and then it will come out, and if it does not come out, then pierce around it to the entire i. forest subtle, as long as the skin around it is enlarged, and then treat it.
And if the arrow is put back in its place in the body so that it cannot be seen, then cover the whole wound. And if you feel it, then treat it with no suitable instrument;
And if you cannot by the widening of the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins, then widen it as much as the wound is large; and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its end with which it holds,
and treat the arrow if you can, and if it has ears at its end with which it holds, if you remove the shaft that is stuck in two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out; and skillfully so that you do not break the arrow but rather draw it out more easily.
And if you cannot at once, then bring it up until the joint is warm, then treat it, for the extraction is easier. And if the bleeding contradicts you, then administer what we have said of the cure in its chapter;
and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and put anything you can to draw out the arrow without danger;
whether quickly or slowly, whether firmly or gently; and set the patient according to the form that it was in when the arrow hit him. for it is the greatest help if it can be done, and if you cannot, put it according to how the signs show you.
The arrow that comes from another place, or where one sees nothing of it, or the skin is swollen in place if one sees or feels it apparently:
cut then above, as much as the tongs can take, and then extract it; if it leaps out now.
And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out.
and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it out with the whole shaft.
and if the shaft has broken, and you see to administer pushing, then administer one instrument with a head, so that the point of the arrow enters into the head of the instrument; and then push it out.
and if the arrow is lodged, put one instrument with a point entering it, to facilitate extraction.
And if the arrow is encircled, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can. then treat the wound as is fitting.
And if the arrow falls into the groin or belly or bladder or ribcage, and it is near, and you can cut above it, then cut.
And keep from covering the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if necessary is. And the care until it is healed.
The form of the forceps used to treat arrows is similar to an eye beak, and here is the shape:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Of veins of the common body Of veins from which one is healed there are thirty-one, of which the head has sixteen.
That is to say: two veins that are behind the ears, called the two "herbechs". and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing; and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, called "aspirers"; and the vein that is taken from the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two veins that are on the neck; and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly opened are five in each arm.
One is the cephalic, and it is on the inside of the left side of the body, and the common people call it "vein of the head". And the middle one is called "basilic", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the outside of the body, and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and is on the fossa and is the one from which blood is drawn, which clearly opens on the pouch.
And the saphenous vein is the one between the ring finger and little finger, and it has two branches;
and in the leg and where the foot is, there are three veins: one of which is below the curvature of the pouch of the left hipbone; and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein that is called "ness," which is in the ankle of the other side.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
The vein of the veins that are after the ears if it helps with old catarrh, and migraines; and the quality of the  vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient,
and the quality of the  vein, as I tell you, and is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a splint. until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head. then place it over your back, and where you feel the pulse below your back, press down there;
then take the lancet, and insert it below the vein until you reach the bone, then lift your hand along the whole vein upwards; and cup and the skin and the vein well two fingers through, and make blood flow as much as you see;
then strain and bind it, until it is healed.
and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
The  draining of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for an old migraine, and sudden, and habitual eye diseases, and to the body of the sharp tears eyes.
and the qualities of blood are like I say: and that the patient strains his neck, so that the two veins appear clearly; and feels the pulse below his back, and then grasps it;
then lightly raise the heart above the vein to your right index, and thrust the needle below. and raise the vein upwards, and the cup, as you have done with two other veins, and make a correct drawing of blood according to your need.
then untie the patient, and put your right hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on top.
and then form the bandage, and leave it on until it is healed; and we have spoken of this before and of their cutting and extraction, as the beginning of the book.
The bloodletting of the vein of the forehead is as valuable as the bloodletting of the cephalic for illnesses of the face ancient, and migraine, and redness.
And the qualities of this are that the patient strains their neck twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "fossor," whose shape is here:
And place the point on the vein, and hold steady with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see; Then tie up the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is healed, and never use a wide flame.
However, it is not right that the flames be too thick; and to heal across, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when it is subtle.
The healing of the two veins that are in the two tear ducts helps the eyes, and the chin, and the cheek, and the eyelid, and illnesses of the face.
and the qualities of their healing are that the patient strains his neck by twisting with a bandage, as before.
Then the healthy flesh is cut, and it should be like the length of a flame, a bit wide, because there is no flesh there.
And if the flame is fine, it may break; then make a correction with blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with cotton, and bind it well.
The opening of the vein for the purpose of letting blood is good for fever, for  inflammation, and for diseases of the face. such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, even when it is old.
And the qualities of the vein are such that the patient tightens his neck, then pulls his chin to your left hand and takes a subtle long flame, and puts it between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well enough, and blood will begin to flow now;
and do not let it flow too much, and make the blood flow according to your need, then tie it up for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
The blood of the two veins helps in the treatment of the spleen, and at the beginning of measles, and many diseases, and itching, and corrosion, and herpes, and inflammations;
and the qualities of the blood are that the patient draws his neck out from under both, as we have said; and let the master be standing above the head of the patient, and the patient sitting on one stool,
Then heal the vein with a long incision, then treat the blood appropriately, as much as is necessary.
Then redo the other part in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and restrain both veins moderately. So that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, that the wound be healed.
Of healing of veins The blood of the veins of the lips from above helps to heal in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and to wounds and sores.
And the qualities of the blood is to make the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you know them by this that they are black, and by this that around them there are small black veins: Therefore, one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt.
Therefore, one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt. if you take the largest of each part, and also make two veins that are above and below, because it is the same manner.
Of the vein below the tongue The vein below the tongue is helpful after the cephalic vein, and it is for the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
And the qualities of the vein are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts the tongue, and looks under on each side a black vein:
Therefore feel one and both, and do not go too deep, for below are the arteries.
The veins of the arm which one commonly feels are felt in two manners:
or they prick at all  one finger's breadth wide, or olive-shaped subtle as you feel trenches, and is called "anesis"; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins. The shape of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
And it is necessary for opening the veins that are heavy with abundant visible blood, and which contain thick and troubled blood; and this is the shape of the olive flame:
and it is more subtly pointed, and is for opening veins subtly, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The bleeding of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with ailments that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the belly;
and it is necessary for the bloodletter to bleed skillfully, and that he should avoid the artery that is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it behooves him to stop it, as I have said; and flame must not be piercing but cutting like a knife.
And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you restrain it, and change another one; or you want no vein of it, or you make in its place the vein in the arm: it opens manifestly; and the cut with the flame knife, as we have said.
And if you see to know the place of the sinew, then it is right that you extract the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse. then sign the place with ink, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein of the flame asleep;
and guard that you do not wound in the artery when you see the place inflamed, because it is from the artery: therefore avoid it.
And if you see it rise upwards as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery: Haste yourself therefore, and put your knee upon length, then remove your knee if it does not stain, which many times happen.
Bind his arm, and leave it thus, and do not move it the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
And if the wound is not stained, and it weeps, and the medicine is not present, then cover the artery if it opens, for the head of the retraction; and stain the wound.
And take a rind of fig, and make it, and take one of the halves and tie upon well until the other day;
If the bleeding is stopped, that is good; if not, treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop bleeding;
And the stopping of the blood is not always easy in many situations because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm's ligament.
The blood from the vein in the middle helps treat blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and cephalic, as we have said;
And it is necessary for the healer that he search for the nerve which is below, and if he does not find it too much, and he finds the nerve, and he inflames it and the healer's hands are burned, and by chance cannot heal;
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its subtlety, then you must heal it with the instrument of the nail; and grasp the nerve with your power.
And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then make a cut along its length.
The blood of the cephalic vein helps, it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
and it is necessary to vein by pricking it in the olive branch or the myrtle branch, because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not have nerves or arteries.
However, it is necessary to seek the lightest place, and nothing grieves if it fails the first time, and one begins again; and by chance it swells for some men, even if it fails the first time, but it does not grieve. The qualities of blood are according to your thinking.
The first thing you must know about bloodletting, is that it is administered only to preserve health.
and to ward off diseases to come; and that the bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins which are or ought to be: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilica. and one must bleed at the beginning of Lent in spring, and in autumn and in winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
and one must bleed the first day or the third, after two or three hours or a day.
The bloodletting which is administered to the sick does not have a set time, but when need is of day or of night, at all hours and in all times;
and it does not behoove to bleed children until fourteen years, nor women carrying fruit from the fourth month until the seventh. Do not bleed the old who have passed 60 years.
And when some want to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema. if they have much phlegm retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous putrid matter to the principal members;
do not bleed those who are too full of meat, nor who are drunk, as long as they are intoxicated, nor the dropsy-afflicted.
and if it were to worsen after colic passion and vomiting and stomach pain, and multiplication of labor in women, and childbirth, and wakefulness and fasting, and whatever through all virtue, or by things of the weapon or of the body;
then subtly regulate the humors, if it is thick, by meats and drinks and medicines, if you have their power;
then enter into a bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly regulate the blood;
and drain the vein of the lower third, as we have said;
and guard yourself on that day of labor, and of pricking, and of lust, and of similar things;
and be tied and joyful, and let the healer's hands be higher than those who are healed, and rub the arm two or three times
then draw the linen upward in the middle, for when it is too stretched out or pulled, then it cannot be corrected without injury.
and then rub that place with your hands until the veins swell up and you feel them;
Then moisten the vein with a drop of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand upon that vein below its place where he wants to bleed. that the vein may not be felt and feel like it is being pierced. For there are veins that swell as ropes when bled, and some that are full of windiness, so that when one puts the cautery upon it, it retracts from the cautery and cannot open the vein, and thus is this type
and if he opens the vein, then the wound is too tight, for this reason it is necessary that the healers be advised in these things.
And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, it is restarted once more a little below where it was or above carefully, if the area isn't swollen.
And if the area is swollen and the patient feels anxious, let him rest for one or two days, and don't bind his arm at all: for it may happen that an abscess comes to a head; nor does he enter into the bath, then restart the bloodletting if he wishes.
and if the opening is small, or the vein is too thin and you doubt that it isn't as much blood as you see, then fire in that same opening all the way to the tip straight.
and work a little gently, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the place inflamed, then do not begin bleeding again, and put a little bit of oil on it, because it soothes the body of blood, and is mixed in this place with the oil.
and thus administer the oil in every bleeding that you bleed the veins, to stop the flow of blood.
and this same thing happens with a triangle and a bow of theirs, when it is put on the place; so subtle is its feel and it separates when it is too large.
And if there comes an abscess that is large, which happens often, even when it is not drained except for the time when the opening of the vein is small, if you hasten and put on top the sponge moistened in water and with some hot wine, and restrain it an hour;
and it is necessary that you do this after the exit of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days no blackness or greening, then it does not harm him; and if you see, put upon anything of aloes or frankincense  put back into juice of calamint, wormwood, or semblance.
And many times abscesses and appearance at the saint's basilica happen: put therefore your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft at the compression of the hand, then is that appearance evil. Therefore, I advise you that you do not put upon it anything of what we have said, because perhaps a vein lies within; but make one dry plaster to harden the place, then cure with another cure, until it be healed.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the wound is black, let it drain until it is red; and if you see it swollen, let it shrink until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it befits him who is weak and ill, and has need of bloodletting, that one makes a wider wound for him, and let the flames be wide.
And to him who is feeble, do the opposite, and it befits him to bleed little and often, and one should bleed him by cutting across, not by pricking.
And this manner of bleeding is safe from the depletion of blood and cutting of nerves, and it is worth more than bleeding long or wide.
And to one whose body needs to be opened for bloodletting, it is appropriate to give moist bread in pomegranate juice; if he is feverish, treat him with blood three or four times.
And if he is of cold complexion, give him moist bread before bloodletting in syrup of quince, or in syrup of honey aromatic with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and syrup well-scented.
And if he faints during bloodletting, after the issue of some blood, it is appropriate that he smells broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup.
and use of other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the opening of veins.
And if he wants to drain his arm, and bleed other times if necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he should bleed little by little, according to the quantity of his strength continuously.
And who wants to drain his arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
And whoever wants to be bled from another place, he must bleed on the second day or the third.
Because he has much blood in his body that is already exhausted, and brings fever; so it is necessary to draw a large quantity, and widen the opening until it flows into portions. since you have treated all the conditions of health, and put your hand upon his pulses when he is healthy, that death may not come in place of pain and this happens many times, when the healer is negligent.
and it is not proper when you see  the arm to be loosened, and make blood flow a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press forcefully upon it; but if it is curved, have him extend his arm carefully, for otherwise it would be harmful.
but let it stay until it heals the second time; or you prick it at the tip of the flame, as long as the vein that is frozen by being pricked does not return. and put on top I. part of boiled oil, and press lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave it and do not constrict it at all, until the abscess subsides.
And if there is a need to draw blood for the second time, let it heal in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein from which blood is drawn from the arm is located near the vein of the neck because it is composed.
And the manner of drawing blood is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the bone is red;
then it is bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then blood is drawn now across, not through the wide or long;
and let the opening be wide, and let blood be drawn well near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drawn from there, then put the hand back in hot water, and leave the blood to run in the water until you have enough;
and if it is in this state, do not immerse the hand in hot water, because one puts it more into winter than in summer.
and the vein of this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither artery nor nerve in it.
The vein of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how:
strain the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, if one sees it; and if it is broken out of alignment, and if you cut it through completely, it will not harm anything.
and do not press too hard on them for the nerves are all bare of flesh,
and then put the hand in hot water if it is frozen stiff in the wound and cannot be pulled out.
And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, then put oil and wool on top of the vein to close it well, and do this with each wound.
The vein of the left hand is good for the disease of mice, and do everything as I have told you about the right.
The vein of the [soft palate] is good for all diseases that are below the body. such as diseases of the bowels, and retention of flowers, and disease of the hips, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the qualities of this vein are that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs over the vein until it becomes warm, and bind above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go many veins;
so then take the vein there or one wider, or at the ankle, which you deem best.
And if you drain it on the foot, guard the nerves which are below, and drain it by traversing as when cutting; and let the flames be anethesing.
And if he cannot draw out blood from it, put the foot in water, and let the vein be emptied well.
And if the first incision is necessary, then begin the second one above a little bit, because the place is salty; Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and then do the same with the other foot equally.
The place of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of fury, and its incision is worth for the pain of the hip when it is hot blood.
And the qualities of its incision are that the patient enters or baths in it, and is strained above the ankle four fingers by twisting,
for otherwise he does not open the vein; and if it opens, then close it in all the ways that you can, and across. and it is better that you cut it, because the skin is dry, and it is very well joined by hand.
and it is better that you cut it, because the skin is dry, and it is very well joined by hand. And if you do not find it, then close any opening from the leg or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and guard against the nerves;
and make as much bloodletting as you see fit, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and restrain it; she is now healed.
Of windsucks
Windsucks are made of horns, or glass, or wood; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suction which is without piercing is done in two ways: either it is heated, or without heat;
And two others in two ribs of the neck; and the windpipe below the chin; And the windpipe at the two shoulders; and the windpipe above the hips; And the windpipes in the two arms; and the windpipes in the two legs; and the suction cups on the two ankles; and the suction does not treat blood, but of the small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
and therefore it does not weaken one as much, as one does from a vein bloodletting; and it should not be administered, neither to hot nor cold fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is emptied.
And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to suction, or by habit, then let us administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between, and at any time;
for there are some who, when they need to sneeze, have a heavy head;
and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in their neck, and darkness in their eyes;
and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollen tongue, and bleed; and there are those who dream, and see through blood, pus, and death and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and even when it is emitted during the month, we command to vomit after three hours of the day.
The blood of the vein helps to the great pain of the head... that comes to the eyes, and it is not right that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
and this vomiting is in place of the bloodletting of the cephalic vein,
and it is not right for those who are of cold complexion to use it, or who have diarrhea, because it does them much discomfort.
and for this reason it does not behoove the elderly to use them, nor those who have or fever colds.
And those who are healed by it often become oblivious, and for this reason it is necessary to put the suction cup a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
The venting on the neck is in place of the healing of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is good for the treatment of pain. and to the fissure of the channel of the palate, and to all, and to repletion;
and then one must not press too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it can cause obstruction in the stomach or heart.
The two ribs of the collarbone are worth against pains in the head, and ophthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth,
and is in the place of the vein of the basilica; and it is necessary that you command the healer that he presses his hand when applying it so that he does not cut the artery and there comes a hemorrhage
The ventosation below the chin is worth against diseases of the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar ailments that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the veins of the two lips.
The ventilation of the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
The ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins of the arm. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the patient not to prick them too deeply, because they are bare of flesh and full of nerves and arteries.
The cupping glass that is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids from the foundation, and for diseases of the bowels, and it should be large and of iron so that it needs to well suck; and by chance if it were thin, it would break; and there will make great wounds.
The cupping glasses of the legs are sucked open well, because they attract blood from the whole body, and are good for old pains of the hips, and of the thighs, and of the bladder, and soften the joints; and they are placed in the place of the two shins, and of the two ankles, but all the same they weaken the body after long use, and bring weakness in many dispositions.
The manner of placing the cupping glass is that you put it first empty, and suck moderately, and place it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease from this doing until you see the skin red and inflamed, and appear the flow of blood; then fix, and replace the cupping glasses, and take heed to the disposition of the body, because there are those who have thick flesh, and porous skin: so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and a poke deep; and suck lightly.
And if the vein is thick, it is necessary to prick it two times; the first time to make a subtle way for the thick blood.
And if the vein is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we only make one incision.
And if we want a lot of blood, we repeat often; and if the vein is thick, we pierce it through with force, and the end is that the veins be pierced deeply.
And it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin and who has porous veins, that you grease the places of the leeches with oil that is refreshing and dissolving: If it is an inflammation, from violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of pumpkin.
And if it is a boil, from cress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
And if the excess is large and cold, take wormwood oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
And if the one being treated has tender skin and large pores, then it is not appropriate to put any oil on it,
but it is necessary to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or mulberry water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or a similar one.
And he who has much moisture, let him rise from rosemary, or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large superfluities, let themselves be raised by old wine, or buckthorn water, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
and it is not necessary to bleed with a leech before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
and it is necessary for him to be winded when he must be winded and when he is winded. And guard those who are healthy are choleric, and if his blood is too hot and inflamed; if it is necessary for him to eat cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the waist, and similar things;
and minced veal, and  broth meat, and moist meats.
And he who has a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine, which is between old and new, and mince figs, and quince and small oysters and sparrows;
And on the day that he will be vended, he must drink more than eat;
And it is fitting to give no man ever garlic or nutmeg before or after the venesection, in order to comfort the limbs principally; And let the wine be subtle, but it does not behoove those who are hot to drink it.
The suction cups that are placed without hurting are those that are placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and gout, and on the belly and the chest and the hips and the hip, because these members do not suffer to be hurt on their skin.
and one does it only to draw blood from limb to limb. as we place them on the breasts when the child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and chest to diminish the member.
and remove the pain, when there is an obstruction or stone, as it removes by its attractive virtue perhaps the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
and thus it is done when one places it upon the liver and the mouse when there is retained windiness.
and these suction cups are administered empty to suck alone; and at no time are they administered together fire, and at no times filled with tepid water.
as in illnesses of the pleurisy, and in such manner one fills the suction cup with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs suitable to this have been boiled.
The form of the suction cup administered with fire is as follows:
And have 2 fingers wide and half a palm deep, and have or on the cost near the middle 1 small hole, as for putting in a needle.
And be of iron, softened in front so that it does not injure the patient when placed on the limb;
And have in the middle a crossbar of iron or steel, to put a burning candle.
And let them be large and small according to the ailments and the age of those who take them;
because the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and of thin people than of fat people.
And should one then place this suction cup on the limb:
taking a bit of candle wax or one linen cloth, and put it inside the suction cup through the straw that is inside the suction cup, so that the light be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
and then put it upon the limb, and you must be on the opening that we have said, so that when one wishes, then into it goes the vapor, and one removes the suction cup.
and take hold of the linen just as before, and repeat it often, if you have need.
In the suction cup, therefore, which is administered in a disease of pleurisy, to all acute pain, there is no stick nor opening, and it is administered only when it is full of fluid, and it is placed upon the limb just so much.
and this is the form:
Wounds are not treated except in limbs where it is not possible to apply cupping jars because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts. And in their naked flesh, such as the toes or ears, and similar things.
And the qualities of the user are that when you find wounds that are in clear fresh water without corruption, then take them.
And put them into water that is not too hot until they are softened and have nothing in their belly; and then be purified of vein and cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
and when they are full and blacken, if it is there where one can put a cupping, put it, because this does much good after.
If not, raise the place with ease, and then with water, very well, and then sprinkle it.
And if the place heals too much after the poultices, moisten one cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the swelling subsides.
And if the sores are multiplied, put on crushed vitriol, or salt, and similar things, until it is stretched.
Or you put on the spot half of peeled beans, and leave them there until they dry out on the spot, then it will stop now.
And if you need more, take other beans.
And if the beans do not want to be taken, rub the spot with fresh blood, or put a needle in it until the sores come out. and then put them above, and as soon as they feel the blood, they burn.
and when you see that they are bleeding, powder on a bit of aloe and wool ground together, or ash, and they will now stop bleeding.
Here begins the book of fractures.
This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is concerned with the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear friend, that the folly of this chapter lies in the fact that they never saw any of the ancient books or read any letters.
And for this reason, knowledge is missing from our land, because I never found any good one.
And I know nothing else, except through the science of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have mastered its science, and through experience, and by the custom of my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have abridged it at the end, and clearly showed the forms of the instruments that are brought, as I did in these two chapters before.
It is therefore necessary that we say here in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise place his understanding, and remain on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age.
or if the limb is not very warm, or too cold; and avoid cold things, that is to say, cold meats, and mutton and veal, and do not drink wine, and do not eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with meats which fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of a hot abscess, or an expansion of matter in the limb; so return the patient to his first state of government that he has used.
And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, such as wheat cooked in water, and rice, and testes, and pies, and tripe of calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and thick wine, and similar things. For with such nourishment they recover strength and more quickly the fracture.
And know that the broken bones of the old and the decrepit do not well recover nor join according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
but if there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, the large tendons that hold it and join the limb together, until it forces as it was before; and do not remove any part of its work, and for this reason it is necessary to nourish them with large meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the leg, or the thigh, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For there are fractures that go awry, and others in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing.
For there are fractures that go awry, and others in sharpening, like the point of a pen for writing. And if a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.
And to each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes to in its place.
And is known the fracture of the bone by those who the parts are twisted, and well open by outside, and sound in the presser of the hand;
And when there is no twisting nor sound at touching, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no fracture;
but it may well have twisting, or fracture, or small breakage. If you should not move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after here, and then restrain it carefully.
And know that the fracture that goes in a circle, and are the two parts disjointed, it is necessary now to put them together evenly, so that an abscess does not form.
And if an abscess forms there, let him not touch it for a day, until the abscess is calmed; then put it equally to the joint that you can easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of that one where there are parts; then restrain it, as it is fitting afterwards.
And if in the bone is broken into pieces, if it is of two parts, if it is hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small member, or to two cords, or to one cord and to your hand;
and put the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you move by all means the additions in their places to the joint as much as you can, and keep that through your work there comes no injury or pain to the patient;
and adjust well the two shoulders of the bones according to the best forms.
And feel it well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well; if the dress beautifully, and do not restrain it too much, nor press as those who make it come by their work abscess hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
And when the limb is in place, so carefully bind the patient that he does not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and guard well that the limb be so secure that he feels no pain at all. Because when he feels no pain, except at a point, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain;
Because when he feels no pain, except at a point, and it is necessary to put him in such a disposition that he feels no pain; and keep that he be put straight, that twisting doesn't come when he is restored.
and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and similar: so it is necessary to wrap them in soft and fine linen cloths;
and those that are thick, such as hips and legs: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and hard linen cloth, because the wide linen embraces the whole large limb, and restrains it on all sides equally, so that there is no gap;
then tie around light bandages, 3 or 4 turns according to the limb, and tighten your hand a little on all the linen, then go above the fracture and restrain it less, so that the fracture is then moved away a bit from the fracture;
and soften the linen little by little, until you feel most of the healthy part, then take another linen cloth, and turn it around directly above the fractured place;
then return to the part below the fracture, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first place above
then put between the swollen ties of linen or cloths, until it is all equal, then bind everything above with a bandage, and then place your well-made pads on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing on the abscess above, which removes the swelling, and leave it so for some days.
Then strain the pads on top, and be of half a good width cane properly cut, or from rods which one makes the clews (or stakes), or from palm ribs, and be according to this figure.
but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others;
and also as long as it is necessary for the limb of small size or large size;
then bind on the splints just as you did in the first layer, then tie above with a thread evenly, just like in the first layer on the fracture;
tighter is applied above, looser below; and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and be of soft linen;
for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in works of fools who make their stitches with cords of linen twisted, and this is a great error, for the stitch cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not be that between each star there is less than two finger's width of space.
And if the patient is sore in the joints of the stitches after the tightening in their healthy places, then put under them pads of linen or wool felt, so that it does not turn blue.
When the wound is with the crushing, and the bones are broken, I will tell you its cure here after.
And know that it is not fitting to bind all broken limbs on the first day. For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put on bindings immediately rather after five or seven days, or more according to your certainty of abscesses coming hot.
and see here the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsion: and it is that you take flour that is held at the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, not too light nor too thick, and in use, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in many ways, and also to women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take  three parts each of amber, laudanum, henbane, asafoetida, and gum arabic, and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make it into a powder, and mix it with plenty of egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones well, and is worth to many men.
Another manner of ointment that is good for torsion: take mugwort and wormwood, ana. x. z.; myrrh and aloes, ana. viiij. z.; acacia vi. z.; Armenian bolis .x. z., and grind well, and confit with water or the yolk of an egg, and administer it.
Another manner of ointment for joints and bones that are out of place, and it soothes the pain that comes, and the use of bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and soak it in hot oil and boiled oil, and put it on the sore spot. This plaster does not restore (things) but it is good for soothing a hot abscess, and removing the pains properly.
Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another manner of poultice for the restoration of bone fracture and to lessen the remaining abscess. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, violet flowers, flour of verbena, each one part; and grind, and boil with wine, and if the limb is cold, add it with moist coriander water, or water, and use.
Another manner of poultice stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of wormwood, and flax seeds, balm, melilot, and elecampane, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and grind, and boil with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ipocras states in his book that one should put on the broken limb for restoration only a certain made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems Galen that one must put on the broken limb, to restore, things dry and a little hot, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Another manner of plaster that is good for the lesion and pain: take mugwort and chevolz [likely referring to a type of herb] of oxen cut, or feathers of owl, and vismalve [possibly a type of plant], and seal in equal measure, and grind them, and make it into a plaster and apply.
And then remove the bandage a little after, and take care if the patient feels no pain, or the bones have not moved from their place; otherwise do not remove it for many days.
And if pain comes to the spot, or itching, lack of rest, or swelling, then hasten and remove it, and take off the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and sponge of sea moist [meaning soaked in sea water], and dip it in water, and raise the spot, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased. then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and tie it with a nut, as long as you are sure of the hot abscess;
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and be removed the pain, then recommence the fine binding, and a little ointment, and do not bind it as tightly as before; and subtly until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess is hot and red, and the pain and swelling are gone from all of it, and you need ointment and binding, then recommence it, as you did first initially.
And if nothing comes to the limb of what we have said, then do not unbind it for less than 3 days or 4 or 5 or 7; and never leave it unbound for 20 days, according to what one sees, until the fracture heals, and approaches the joining of the flesh together;
therefore he should be restrained more than before, and you must thicken his flesh as I said above; and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that there cannot come nourishment therefore arise the hot water then, every time you loosen it, and every third day, and moisten a bit the place;
for this work therefore shortens the nourishment to the limb, and mends quickly those who do foolishly, that they return the limb twisted: it is bad, and thus is the work dangerous, and I do not see anything else than to let it be and work it straightly.
of various ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined.
For there are fractures that are made from the impact of a sword, and the bone collar all the bone until the shaft which is below the bone, like done high or stick; and for this reason this kind of fracture is called "hachure".
When the sword chops the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and is the wound of these two fractures large or small.
And if there is an impact embedded, or splitting or of the collarbone, or of the heel on bone, or other similar things.
And if there is a fracture penetrating, which approaches to the membrane that is beneath the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
And if the wound that is placed in the bone as finely as a horsehair, and the fissure is small, and for this reason this fracture is called "capillary";
And if the wound is made either by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by something similar, and drives the piece of bone inward, and it lies as do the cauldrons when they are heated on the cauldrons; so does the stone enter within.
And this happens more often to those who have or whose head is moist bone, such as the head of a child;
and there are in all these ways of fracture that small pieces are severed as if they were stars; and I will speak of them in their place.
And let us know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the inquiry into tents, and by the corrupted cartilage that is above.
The resemblance of capillary is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubs it above, the fracture appears black.
In the cure of the fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of phlegm, and loss of understanding, and extension, and paleness, and fever ague, and the eyes becoming redder and more inflamed, and other similar signs in more dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
And if you do not see an unfavorable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
And when the fracture first comes to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day as much as you can.
And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and the accident we have said comes.
And if the fracture of the bone comes to the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the broken part as follows: and it is that you prick the head of the wounded person and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more carefully than you can.
And if bleeding comes when discovering the bone, or abscess pus, help them as is proper, and that you fill the place with cloths moistened in rose oil; and make the wound rest until the abscess pus is calmed, and be sure of bleeding; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to .ij. ways of work: one way is that you cut at the narrow side in front, and this is the form:
And then put .i. other cutting larger than the first.
And the second way is that you have a number of cuttings of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, and pointed, and made of iron. And in work lightly, that you do not cut through the bone.
And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce it below, so that you administer chisels with drill bits, lest they go beyond the bone; and it must have above its point a rim or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and it is necessary that you have several of these, so that each comes in its place from the width of the bone, so that you have drills for all types of bones; and this is the form of the three kinds of drills:
The quality for piercing below a broken bone is that you put one drill on the bone, and turn with your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the drill elsewhere a little afterward, and do this all around, then cut with the cutting tools the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you have such as pliers; and keep that you do not touch the marrow nor the dura mater.
And when you will have pierced the bone, and treated it, then it is necessary that you remove the debris which is stuck to the bone with every instrument similar to a cutting tool, but it is necessary that it be tougher and more subtle than the other cutting tool;
and if it remains nothing of the small bones, nor any scales, so lightly to the bones with. i. instruments; then cure the wound with tents and ointments that we have said.
And the other manner of work is that which Galien says, which is drier; and the load very hard, and that is his word. It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will put beneath the head of this lens-shaped instrument, from which this is the form:
And do not cut on one part, and it is the pointed part in.ij. sides, so that the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet above, so that you gently chop the bone all around, and be well guarded of the cloth that is underneath;
If it is stuck to the bone, then gently extract it, because it should be extracted easily without pain and fear.
And if the broken bone does not pierce to the skin, and the bone is only cut from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to reassemble those asperities, and remove the scales with a fine razor which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If you start with large razors, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not cease until it is well.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle fractures, it is necessary that you administer care according to its disposition; and this thing is not returned to him who has put his study into this art.
And if the wound is uncovered, then it befits you to take i. piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another piece of cloth doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not injure the wound, then administer above i. other linen, and do not bind it too tightly except that it holds the wound only;
And leave it so for one or two days, until the abscess is calmed, then untie it, and administer medicines such as roots of lily, and powder of quince, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and put on the wound, and administer further medicines mixed with honey without mordication;
and guard that the wound be quite clean, that you do not leave there any ointment, nor do you let it gather a crust, because when a crust gathers upon the brain tissue, it will rot and cause great harm to the patient; because when one puts on top of this thing biting, it bites upwards.
Take guard therefore, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, then it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come there except due to the medicine that one has put on, then it is proper that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue one veil, and put it on the thing. then the cure of manners of cares that it is fitting, until it be healed.
Know that sometimes the two parts of the bone above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones; and the lower one is cartilaginous, and does not break, unless it be forced or twisted, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is fitting that you put your small finger or point of the bone, and put each fracture inside your index finger, and to the pouch outward, until the bone returns according to its natural shape; and do this gently, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the fracture is in the part above the knee, and it cannot come to its place, then you should put it equal to the head of a stick, a bit thick.
And if the fracture is in two parts, make another one like it, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
If this is not possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has been calmed, then bandage to the head of the knee ten bandages of linen, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put one on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the hollows of the knee.
And some restorers say one must moisten the tents in butter and change them each day. It does not seem well to me, but it is proper that they be moistened with a confection of yolk of egg, and powder of millet; then leave the tent as long as the bone is stiff, and the cartilages hardened.
And at times one puts down goose feathers in place of tents, and if there is one-half a cloth draped over it, and the wound is held and the patient is breathed upon; or do what you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the wound as you work on it, put a piece of cerate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in one part of aqua regia.
And if an abscess forms there, put a poultice outside, made of sesame flour and incense powder, congealed with egg white, then place light bandages on top, and do not bind it at all.
And if the fracture of the bone is small and broken into many pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then sew together the split, and treat with things that are healing flesh, and stitching, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
And if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat it with splints and place planks inside it until it is healed.
Of the jaw fracture
When the jaw is broken apart, and there is no wound outside, and the fracture is only outward, and is not broken in two, except for splintering inside, if one knows it lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your right index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently push the fracture inward, and hold it with the other hand outward, and make it even.
And if the jawbone fracture is broken in two, it is necessary that you administer extension of two parts, until it is even.
And if movement of the teeth occurs, or fracture, then strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put upon the broken jaw cerote, and put upon one double cloth; and put upon the cloth a large star well made, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it on as much as you can, and command the patient that he rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then put back what has changed; and put plaster on top, of powder from the mill with abundance of egg or sesame flour, after that which you have removed the cerote; and put on light cloth above the plaster, and if the plasters dries, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is sound; many times it is sound in three weeks.
And if an abscess comes, then administer that which we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward that no piece of the bone is removed; so subtly of the removal as the instruments suitable to this.
And if the wound is narrow, so enlarge it with flame according to your need.
And when you will have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, so sew the wound, if it is wide, and put on i.  plaster suitable to this, in order to prevent flesh, until it is healed.
of the forceps The fracture breaks many times before the shoulder, and the fracture is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a fracture with a wound.
And the work is then when the fracture is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which is the fractured bone; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put each fracture to your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor defect.
And if you need to extend it further, put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or wool, and be large according to your necessity; and being and light the bone, and restrain the sphere to your hand, so that you put each fracture as it should be.
And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder with force because it comes in its way, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back and put under the shoulder one-half hour, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
And then address the fracture to your two, and if you find it broken, then it is necessary that you split above; and treat the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any tightening, then cut at one of the incisors that you have; but that you put under the shoulder this instrument, in order to guard the syfac:
And it seems a spoon, and is not at all hollowed out, and be also wide as it is convenient, according to the size of the bone and the skill of the work; and have two heads, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as it is the break of the wound that you made when you treated the bones;
and when you are assured of the hot abscess, if cut the wound, and if the rupture is small, or if you doubt hot abscess, then apply the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
And if a hot abscess comes, moisten one drape in rose oil and in honey and in wine, and put on top.
The setting of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on top of the bone the plaster of the powder of the mill and of egg white, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the hip, if you have need of it; Then take a very wide bandage of one palm in width, then put one double drape on top of bandages and the plaster; then take a subtle board three fingers in width and length, and encircle it with that bandaged cloth, so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and place the splint on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the healthy shoulder, and under the injured shoulder; and pull each part together, and when you see that the ligament holds the fracture well, and you clearly see that the splint does not move above the broken bone, then reward him every day, and when the ligaments slacken, then restrain them;
and make the patient lie on his back, and put him when he sleeps one small pillow under the shoulder, to raise the shoulder higher; so it will alleviate the fracture of the collarbone by lifting the shoulder, or tie his arm to his neck, and do not untie it except a bad accident happens, up to twenty days;
then begin again the plastering if you see that he needs it, and restrain him and leave him so, until he is restored; and it is restored at most in twenty-eight days, and in less time to some men.
of the fracture of the shoulder
It happens that the shoulder breaks or its long bone is broken in the middle, and one feels it only by touch; therefore, set it according to the figure of the fracture and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then put on top of the place powder from the mill with abundance of egg, and light bandages, and put on .i. double cloth; then put on a broad and fine splint, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the splint is sticking in any place of the shoulder, use that hair from bandages of linen so that the splint lies evenly; and then restrain it with a very firm bandage, so that the splint does not move from its place, and look at the limb each day; and every time that it softens, restrain it, and put back evenly the splint if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in .xx. days or in xxv. And when this number is completed, untie it, and be sure, because it is not bone that comes out easily.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes outward before and not below the shoulder joint, do it like this, and apply the bone, and make what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to soothe a hot abscess.
of the fracture of the leg
The leg is sometimes broken in the middle, but this rarely happens; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it bends to the side, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of feeling, and numbness, and perhaps vomits blood, and the skin appears tight on the broken bone, and it hurts a lot.
And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back, and he puts one cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and he joins the sides of the two bones with his hands, and subtly brings them together in every way that he can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be; then put bandages and bandages above the thin skin of salt, or some other light paste, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it over the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around to the back, and tighten it well, and watch every hour the ligature, and if it softens, tighten it; and if it is necessary to loosen it, for corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hasten and loosen it, and clean what has come there with methods of treatment; then put the bandage back on, and tighten it until it heals.
of the breaking of the ribs
Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in their thick parts after the back, and at the top inside, and they bend only because they are glassy; and one feels it well upon inquiry on the sides.
And the restoration is that you put equal the fracture, as it should be. And then place the splint, and restrain it with a stick, if you need it.
And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning inwards, the patient feels very great pain and sharpness, as well as pleurisy, because the bone pierces the tissue; and besides sharp pains, and coughs and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is of serious illness, and the ancients have put great importance on it.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats which inflate the belly, in order to drive the wind out.
We do not do this, except for hot abscesses if they have not come. And if it has come, then treat it.
And they say that no one should put suction cups on the area to draw out fluids strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup draws out the superfluities at the place for the weakness of its disposition.
And they said one of you should cover the place with a soft wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the air equal, then be cured from the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that pricks the skin, and there is fear for the patient, then it is necessary to cut on the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath one instrument to guard the cavity; and then one must saw the bone, and draw slightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure it with ointments, until it is healed. And if an abscess arises, then put soft bandages in rose oil, and put them on the place; and cure while the place of what it should be for an abscess, and lie lying against the ribs where it must be, until it is healed.
of the fracture of the neck
Sometimes a fracture occurs to the bones of the neck, and sometimes it happens that it bends; and also in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it. Know that he is mortal in most cases, and if he moves them and feels well when they are pulled and pointed, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured, if one puts care to it.
And if similar thing comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if he will be healed or not, take note if his feet are softened, and if the accidents are in his hands, and on his back there is a swelling and expulsion without will; and when one has him lying on his stomach, there is an expulsion without will. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that he is mortal: if he does not labor well in his cure.
And if this accident does not happen to him, then it is a lighter thing.
And the cure is that you reward him if there is an abscess hot, then put on the spine rose oil or oil of egg yolk, as long as it is appeased; then put on a comforting and drying plaster, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed. And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cover it with the heart; and remove the bone, then assemble the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with a suture, then cure with an ointment that encourages flesh, until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the “head of the cow,” put your pouch in your left hand, and place it equal to the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and bandage on top, if you need it; then restrain it, and if there are dislocated bones, do it again, remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, if it had not been for a little weakening at the head; and making long, and declining to the sides, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and throbbing, and swells what breaks.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand upon it, as long as you are on the fracture; and know which is the fracture and the form of it; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put equal that fracture, as long as it is in natural figure.
And if the fracture is long, or it declines to the inside, then make the patient lie on his belly, as long as the restoration of that fracture is apparent to you. And when you have put it even, put it on the plaster, then put a support of wood or of kerf, and restrain the splinter so that it does not move; and employ the place under the ribs, until the splint is even.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or on their back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed, and put on what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and restrain it as it should, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
of the shoulder fracture
The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take one staff of medium thickness, according to this form:
And bind the two heads with two bands, and raise them up, and make the patient sit on one seat; then place his broken arm on the staff, until it comes to the armpit, and has a bend of staff in the middle, then place on any heavy thing or ministers extend it downward; then put the fingers of your hand together, as long as the fracture returns as it should.
And the other way is that one supports the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one holds what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below at all one length, and extends each to its part.
And if you see that the extraction is more distant, bind .i. linen under the fracture, and on the fracture, and extend each of the ministers to its part. And if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put .i. linen medium under the bone, and .i. other towards the outside, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the outside, it is necessary to put .i. linen lightly, without labor, until the fracture is equal on the top, and on the outside; then place the fracture equally as it is necessary, and bind, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess does come, do not bind it until .vij. days, and put on linen half in oil and rose oil, until the abscess is calmed; then bind it, and the manner of binding it is that you put the splint on the fracture, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and put the drape, and bind on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something prevents you, or if the bone is not set.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use splints, and put on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint .i. two of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes the fracture .iij. two on each side; then bind on the splints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less far apart.
And if you see the seating of the splints, and the binding, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, then let it remain bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days the bandaging, that itching nor swelling does not come to the place, or the dressings cannot come to the limb for that it is too strained. If it agrees, as we have said.
And if none of such accidents comes, then do not unbind it before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and put under the shoulder one cushion plain of wool evenly, and look every hour of the day or of the night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or be softened the bindings; if it agrees by the virtue of medicine, and give him the food that we have before put, in such manner that the food is at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, let it be coarse. And it is customary that the shoulder and leg ought to be taken back in forty days of the whole; and then one must unbind and administer bath and medicines of healing for the place to heal. And if the constriction is ugly and encumbered, then remain unbinding for one day or two months.
of the fracture of the arm
The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the two «foscile», because one is small, and that follows the shoulder; and the other is large, and that is below, towards the little hip; perhaps breaks the big foscile alone, or the small, and perhaps andui together.
When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large is broken, so is the healing bad, and more grievously than when they are broken together. If it is the small foscile that is broken alone, then it should be gently stretched, and put straight.
And if it is the large foscile, then it should be strained more strongly; and stretched on one cushion, and hold the shoulder of the hand higher than the others, and the little hips lower than the other hips, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and one cushion in front of him higher, that the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the ministers some arm to the underside to his hand, or to one linen, and another minister to another above. And then put the mirrors straight, according to its best form.
And if in the fracture there are pieces, so put each one in its place, and if there is any detached that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do as with the bone, as we have said before.
And if with the fracture there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take care of it.
And if at the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, so glue it; I mean a bandage of cerote made of rose oil and white wax, that it be not too hard nor too soft; and tie the bandage on top carefully, until the abscesses have subsided. Then remove the cerote, and put the plaster of ground flour with an abundance of egg, then place splints, and let the splint of the fracture be more in depth, and a little wider than the others; and know that it must have six splints or arms in more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or two; and tighten it more on top of the fracture than elsewhere, and every day less apart, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages which are on top of the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread, with which it is bound, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And reward the limb and the bandage after some days. And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you raise the limb with hot water, until the itching is appeased; and leave the limb not even a little rest. And then begin the tightening again, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones are dislocated, and similar things, so the address.
And if it happens that the numbing cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, then you must soften it a little, and leave so for several days, until the numbing corrects, and then tighten it.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not loosen him until 20 days or whenever it feels right, then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his shoulders be equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
of the break of the hand
Know that on the back of the hand and to us of the two there happen few fractures, and it comes only but bending many times.
And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it befits that the patient sit crossed, and be straight before him equally; then put his hand on the board extended, and extend the ministers the bones broken, and put them equal the mirrors, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the place; and be wrapped in .i. sheet of linen.
And if the fracture is in the palm toward the belly of the hand, then make a sphere of cloths, and command the patient that he tighten it to his broken palm; and then the restraint of a long cloth, and be the splint of thick wood as large as the palm of the hand, and the restraint, as it befits.
And if the fracture is in the outside, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and bandage the ligament between the two.
And if the fracture comes to any of the two hands, if it is a sprain, set it straight as it should; and restrain it with the palm, and if you see fit put a small straight splint to raise the fracture, and not move it; and if the fracture is in the other hand, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight, and tie it with the healthy hand that follows; or tie them all together in .i. holding, which is better, or put a splint on top, like a sprain; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the hot, dry abscess, and correct what comes to it, as I have said.
of the broken hip
The bone of the hip is many times broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is thus, one above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his back, then extend each minister his limb evenly; and this is when the fracture is between the bones.
And if the fracture is near the root of the hip, then one limb should be towards the heel, and the other limbs below the fracture. Also, if it is near the knee, then one limb should be near the knee, and the other extension down; then place the splint bone evenly with its two hands, as long as it is according to its natural figure, and then put on the plaster, and bandage, unless an abscess comes out.
And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside then return to your work and your cure; the bandage is made in this manner. It is necessary that you envelop upon the fracture .i. with a hard band doubled in .ij. or .iij., and remain the superfluities, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the thigh, and put .i. long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee, and let the chief of the thread go upwards; then turn up the leg and up the hip the band, then put upon the fracture splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the hip with cloths to make equal the tightening, then begin to tie firmly .iij. or iiij. above the fracture; and as much as it goes higher above the fracture, the less you tighten it; then hold as .ij. ends of the thread that you have put between the leg and the hip, and tie .iij. splints which are above, then raise down to the bottom to the chief of the thread, until you come near the foot; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then let it be so, so that there comes no abscess or swelling nor any other semblance.
And if it happens, untie it, and address what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to put them together, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the space open, and drain pus; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
And no times is broken the hip in this way that one puts splints, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, with this restoration made it does not cause pain to the patient.
And know that the fracture is restored in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
of the joint of the knee
Know that in the joint of the knee there are few fractures, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is not more than a split, or one perforation, and it has all wounds, and no wound, and this is well felt.
And the restoration is as follows: it is made equal to that which is broken in its two parts, until they are assembled as much as possible; then put the splint, and on it a round piece of wood, if you have need, and bind it as necessary, then follow all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, such as hot poultices and similar things;  and apply to each accident what is fitting, until he be healed.
of the fracture of the leg
Know that in the leg there are two bones, because one is called 'mustelz' on the right, and the other is called 'foscile'; and all fractures come as it comes to the arm, and for that reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the work is all the same.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all parts.
And if the smaller bone is broken, then it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and one sees it well; and turns downwards. Then administer extension, and place it even, and bind the splints evenly; but nevertheless, it befits if the fracture is bad, and there are more pieces, that the extension be less and lighter; and the splint according to your virtue.
And when you have accomplished your work, take two pieces of wood that reach the leg on one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee downwards; then wrap in two lengths one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle as well, and at this juncture the leg cannot decline to right or left, and thus it is well; and no one administers one splint along the length of the leg, and if it is of wood, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly made in the fracture where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident; so cure until it is healed.
of the fracture of the bones of the foot
At the ankle there comes no fracture, but the bones of the foot come sometimes fractured and to the two bones, and there have been only a few cases in more dispositions.
And if there comes the bones of the foot fracture, and you see these bones overlap each other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wanted to walk, then put now your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press it until they return in their places; then put the plaster and bandages above, and put under the belly of the foot a small board at .ij. finger-widths wide, then restrain the foot firmly, then that you have wrapped cloths around, and other things which you need.
And when three or four days will have passed, untie the bandage, because you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
And if there are any of the bones broken, return them, as we have said about the bones of the hand; then put on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and be one point wider, then put under the foot that table that I said, and strain it well; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, put on each bone a splint according to its quantity, wrapped in one cloth of linen, and strain the table under the foot; and let it stay on the top of the table above the belly of the foot, so that it holds it well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have said; and secure each accident as it is fitting.
of the fracture of the bone of the finger
When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit with her legs spread apart, then incline her toward the back part, and hold her back; then fill the woman's opening with cotton, and put in as much as one stone; then take out the woman, and lift her back up little by little, and then push the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the stone; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do so for seven days or a little more; thus the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie it to the opening, and put the whole bladder into nature; then blow into the bladder until the bladder is inflated inside: nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it like that for some days, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the arm of the man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; and these fractures near are not hidden from those who put their study and use into them, and read my book. For the fracture signifies in more dispositions the right way of restoration: therefore understand.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's gullet and put it into the penis; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for three days or until healed, and it will heal quickly.
of fracture with wound
It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the wounds that we have said testify to it.
And if the wound heals, then the retention of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin again to restore the fracture in the same hour, or that day, if an abscess does not come.
And if an abscess comes to you, then leave the restoration until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is calmed, and do not touch it neither on the third nor fourth day, for you would bring a bad accident upon it.
And if the broken bone is appearing above the uncovered heart, then it behooves you to put it gently in place with your hands, little by little.
And if the extensions are not available for you to put it in place with your hands, then use this instrument which is of iron, which is .vii. or .viii. long, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this, it is necessary for the smith that he forge .iii. or .iiij., according to what he needs for each case of fracture; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not bend at the compression on the limb in your work, and let it be acute in front and thick from the middle forward, thus:
And it is called "palainche", for which the curved head should be placed on the top of the exposed bone; and push it once, so that it returns, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grip the bone, then you must chop the head of the bone, as long as the instruments have hold of it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, either an incision or saw, to your power; then remove that which remains in the bone of asperities and small splinters.
And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Then do as long as it is in its place, then moisten one cloth in black spiced wine, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put on the wound cerote or anything else where there is oil, so that it does not cause rot and corruption; then administer splints when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give good guard that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times have fools done this wrong, and have brought upon the patient either death or corruption at any time; and let the strapping be softer and more gentle than for other fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will come from it, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it does not behoove to put splints; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after one day or two begin to bulge at the wound, remove that which you have put on top with all wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you untie the limb two times a day, in the morning and in the evening, as long as it is joined and healthy.
And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a manner that the bone aligns gently downward.
And if the next day it does not join more and returns back askew, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause this pain.
And if a fistula comes to the place or any other manner of corruption, then it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before this one. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bones of the hip or shoulder, and similar ones of the large limbs, do not try to set it, because many times death comes from it; but leave it until it mends itself, perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you are able; and if you cannot, then leave it.
of boils which come out of the swelling
We come many times after the health of the fracture, even when it is near the joint, and it is a ugly thing to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps cannot make the members their natural works.
Take ward then if it is fresh to us: if it administers topical medicines like aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, acaica, and similar others, as you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with a stimulating wine or with egg white or with a mixture; and put them on the wound in poultices, and restrain it well, and do not loosen it for days; and then release it, and begin another one, until the swelling is gone; or you strain it on a piece of wood well made; because the properties of the wood are that it removes all the swellings from the members; and if the swelling has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut above, and make the superfluity appear; or you reapply it to any razor, until it is removed, and cure it as long as it is healing.
When the fracture of the bone is restored, and afterward the limb remains weak and thin, this happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was bound too tight, and it was not bound as it should; or because there were too many bindings, and it cannot come to the nourishment of the limb; or for multitude of dressings; or for too much movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him joy and leisure; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts great nourishment, and the dressing often of water boiled, until the nourishment comes to the limb; and returns to its natural figure.
of the limb after the health
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bones are apart, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: so do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb anew, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and comes great harm, and perhaps death; however, if the nodes and the torture are fresh, then it is necessary that they be raised with hot water, or softening herbs be cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and melilote, and similar things; and the you .i. make a mollifying plaster, such as dyaquilon well made, and you take the moss of vismalve, and cook it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and make a plaster on top; or you take fig fats, and grind them with chaff of colon, and similar medicines that lessen the swelling.
And no time is removed the nodes by continual and long rubbing with wet hands. And be administered movement to the limb each hour.
And if the tortuosities are old and hardened, as well as stone, and needs be to remove it with iron, then it is necessary to cut up to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and put care and study into the cure.
Here begins the book of dislocations
A dislocation is an issue from a joint out of its place, for which it cannot move, and the limb is ill-figured, and the patient feels great pain and great injury.
When dislocation comes to anyone, it is now necessary to bring it back without setting a splint.
For if one delays, it swells the limb, and by chance if one puts it back with pain in place; for this reason, one should not move it for the hour that it is swollen: many times it brings pain and other aches.
Nevertheless, when this happens, if you make the patient healthy, then let him, until the abscesses are all appeased; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then move it gently, and cure each member as the wound comes to its place.
And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from the head to the feet.
of the jaws
It happens that the jaws are dislocated and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: either they are a little bit moved from their places, and softened a little; or they are dislocated entirely, and hang toward the cheek, and cut off the saliva of the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with the word.
When the dislocation is small, it returns by the arm's more numerous disarrangements.
And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it carefully, and do not despair;
and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the sick person, and put one hand's fist into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be outside, to make it even; and command the sick person to soften their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the fist put it even, until it returns to its place.
And if it is broken when reset, even if it is the two jawbones together, apply hot water and oil, until they are gently moved; do not hesitate to reset, as we have said.
And when they are reset evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed without softening, put on a soft cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft ligatures.
And let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows so that he does not move them to the right or left, nor does he try to chew, but eat light food until the pains are gone, and the jawbones have set.
and then gently move what he wants, and don't work on opening his mouth to eat and drink, as long as the jaw is well set and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be set in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and customary fits come, and perhaps a bellyache, and perhaps a thick cold vomit.
And when you see these things, then know that it is a death sentence; and many times those who have it die in 8 days.
of the fork
The forceps cannot dislocate from within the side of the ribs, and it is dislocated no times on the outside, and one feels it well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies quite on his back, and extends his arms; and then presses the place with the shape of your palm, and it will return; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it.
And the head which is towards the rib cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates no times, then reset it to its place as we have said; then put on the splint and bandage, and restrain it, and command the patient to rest until he is healed.
And in the same way is brought back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is that it is dislocated to the side of the seat below; and the second is to the side of the armpit; and by chance it is dislocated above, and this happens rarely.
and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the nerves; and many times dislocated below towards the seat, especially in those who have little flesh, because to these it goes easily; in those who have enough flesh, it goes with difficulty, and returns with difficulty.
And by chance it happens to some men percussion or fracture, and inflames the shoulder with a hot abscess, and thinks that it is dislocated because of this.
It is therefore necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it is pulled towards the hip, and puts a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a manifest difference between them. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the hip towards the touch of the top of the shoulder, as if it were one piece; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its place, nor move in any way.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you find it manifestly at the touch.
And this way of dislocation is not otherwise to bring back, when it is new, or if the child is sick.
And the manner is that the ministers lift the hand of the sick person up, then put their fingers under the armpit, and lift the joint with force upward to its place; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it down; so it will come back little by little.
And if it does not come back as we have said in a few days later, then it is necessary that the sick person be bathed in hot water; and the minister a soothing ointment and softening, like decoction of aloe and fenugreek and melilot in water, and be administered.
then be supported the sick person on his back, and put under the armpit a cushion of wool equal, neither too soft nor too hard, then put the heel of the foot on the cushion, and lift the head of the shoulder carefully, and pull the hand of the sick person;
and other ministers hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move down; that shoulder returns all now, and if you see so you reset it according to this manner:
and that you make present one man who is larger than the patient; and be right toward the ribcage, and put his shoulder under the ass of the patient, and lift the ass up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient down toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, so you can put with him any thing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And reset it also in another manner: and is one long stick in earth, whose head be as well round like a pistol, and not too thick nor too thin; then be placed under the patient, but he has a sheet above, and the patient is standing on the long shaft of the stick; then his hand is extended down from the other side, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
and if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take one splint of two arms and four fingers wide, which has the head rounded so as to enter through the hole below the shoulder, according to this form:
then tie above the head of the stick sheet below, so that the stick does not hurt the patient, then put it under the shoulder of the patient; and extend his arm up on the long shaft of the stick, and tie the shoulder on the shaft, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on one rung of a ladder of the wide, and let the hands down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return now.
And when it is in, in any manner that it may be, then you must put under the shoulder a sphere of wool equal, then put the emplastrum prepared of powder of the mill, with incense and auburn of egg, upon all the shoulder and around, then restrain under the shoulder evenly, and turn the linen upon the emplastrum, and embrace the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
And it is necessary that he move little, as long as the limb is fortified, because it will heal faster; and then move more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is stiffened and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another cause, then it is necessary that you administer cautery at 3 punctures, as it is laid out in the chapter of cautery.
And if you do all these things, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is severed or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation which is towards the hip, and the breasts, or behind, it is made by impulse, and stretching of hands, and it administers on another place; and care until it is healed.
And if after the healing comes pain in the limb, and slowness of movement, then use the patient bath many times, until that pain is alleviated, and returns to its first nature.
of the dislocation of the cost
Know that the joint of the rib is dislocated in many ways, and returns in many ways; and if it is dislocated from all sides, even before and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, because it is seen well and felt well; and dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the injured rib with the healthy one, if it is well seen. Because the joint is dislocated and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it in the way that abscesses come. Because if abscesses came to it, it would be grievous to return it; and by chance it cannot be returned completely at all, even when it is behind. It is worse than other dislocations and causes greater pain, and death may come from it by chance.
And the restoration is like this, when it can be brought back, that you extend your hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread out, and the hands do look according to the cut around, above and below, and put the joint to its shoulders together, or at the root of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and firm of the root of the palm the cut which is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with two ministers, so that it does not move during extension; then turn the arm from each side, then when you have enveloped a double cloth long and wide;
And when the mire at the joint to his hand, if the oil of any oil to soften the joint, then put the joint formed, until it returns;
And when it is in place, if put on a dry plaster with yolk of egg, and strain it formed, and bend the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then untie it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, untie the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well aligned, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then untie it.
And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it moves, then bathe him and rub well, and press until he is soothed; or put on the joint a fleece of fat wool, then leave it for i day and night, then remove it, and let him enter into a bath; and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the bandage back on, and then go into the bath; and do so .ii. times or .iii., until he is healed; and if you see, then put on wool fleece moistened with warm butter, and strain over it; it will return to its place.
the dislocation of the hand
The joint of the hand is dislocated, and its return is light, more than the other joints. However, it must be returned to its place carefully, in the same hour that it is dislocated, so that the limb does not become inflamed, or that there comes a hot abscess.
And the resetting is that you place the sick hand on a table, and extend the minister's hand, and he places his hand flat, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes it until it returns.
However, it is necessary that you look if it is well in place; then place the sick person's back of his hand on a table at extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the sick person's back of his hand on the table, and he puts his hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, then bind with soothing ointments and poultices the abscess, and leave him so without restarting it.
And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back in place after some days, the joint remains twisted.
And does not harm the patient further than while the hand is numb, and cannot extract anything at all: therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is no other means but to constrain by cautery according to the case, and perhaps it is worth nothing else.
And when the hand is in place, put on the splint that we have said, then constrain it and leave it for five days, then untie it and leave it so.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no wound, then moisten it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
No time are dislocated the fingers of the hand on each side, no time on the back of the palm or on the belly.
Then are the fingers, and put the dislocation to your pouches until it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
and let it for 2 days, and then put it straight on that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, and unbind it daily, and make it move, and bind it again tightly; and do this often, until it is tight,
and also do the same, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and also do the same, when it is dislocated on another side.
of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
When the shoulder blade of the back or of the neck is dislocated, or there are more than one dislocations, if there is no cure, because death hastens the patient.
And the signs are that the joints jump out without will, and cannot be held in place, and many times are softened any limb, or the two hips or the two arms or one.
And many times the shin moves to four parts; that which moves in the back is called “gilbositez”:
The cure for it is that you ward off if the gilbositez came from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing at all.
And that which comes from a fall or percussion or similar things, the ancients said manners of cures by great words, in which there is no great profit at all.
but I have abridged it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse manners.
I say that in the boil that comes to the breast before, there is nothing healthy.
And also the one that comes directly in two sides, and one cannot cure it except for the one properly that comes to the back, as I say.
And it is that the patient be stretched on his back in one even place, and have strain under him so that he does not move;
Then put one splint at the head on earth forming, and another at the feet, and tie a linen strap under the arms of the patient, and another at the hips, and knees, and ankles;
and the minister knowing the bonds, one at the top and the others at the feet, among the two bones
and be well closed, the splints as we have said, and the minister puts his palms on the spine, forming it, until it revives.
And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board three arms long, and place it under the back, and have the patient lie on his side, and put the head of the board under the back, then place the middle of the board on the spine. and place the minister's feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see fit, do so with the turning pin that turns by hand.
And that you place 2 stakes at the head of the patient's arm, and toward the feet 2 others, and there be between each stake, a palm's width of space long.
And have in each stake 1 hole where the turnbuckle runs, and let the stakes be firmly in earth, so that they do not move; and between each 2 stakes have 1 turning stake, on which the ligament turns, and have in 2 turning stakes 2 small stakes of a palm's length, to turn the turnbuckle.
And then tie the ligament which is among the shoulders to the turnbuckle toward the head, and the other ligament toward the feet to the other turnbuckle, and each of the ministers turns its turnbuckle on all the ligament, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
And when it is even, put on a drying plaster with abundance of egg, and then the bandages, and then the splint of a tablet of 3 inches long, that protects the place of the rib and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a band, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment, until he is healed.
And if any thing comes in the end of the health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint that we have said before; and sometimes one administers a piece of cork,
And sometimes there comes the appearance in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks that it is dislocations; and it is the bone which opens, for which one must not have presumption: by chance would come death.
of dislocations of the hip
Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come out only as dislocations, and they do not come like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to .iiij. parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside then, and less dislocated in front and back.
And the knowledge of this dislocation inside is that when one joins the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens the knee of the sick person more than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot double their knee to the fire. and it is the place which is below swollen with a hot abscess, for that reason because the head of the hip comes here.
And the sign of him to whom it comes to fire, thus is this accident contrary to these before.
And the sign of him to whom it comes before, thus is that he has his leg well according to accomplishment; nonetheless, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wants to make him walk, he cannot before, and retains his urine, and swells the groin, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
And the sign of him to whom it comes behind, thus is that he cannot expand his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place under the ribs.
The treatment of this kind of dislocation is that you observe if the dislocation is old and it remains according to its position, then there is no need for treatment; and it does not behoove him to have presumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and it's of the 4 manners of dislocation, so hurry that you return the joint, and its length inside and outside, and the movement to right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for other cure.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply 1 strong minister, and extend the leg strongly with 2 hands, or with 1 linen that is tied above the knee; and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he pushes his hands below his shoulders, then tightens it with a linen band across the hip; and another holds the head of the linen;
And stretch upwards and downwards at once, as long as the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remain suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If it is not so, then care must be taken to its resemblance. When the dislocation is at the back of the body, you should set the patient on his healthy side, then put a sling under the root of the hip, and where it is below the anger, then extend the sling upwards towards the anger, and towards the shoulder;
then grab with other ministers his arms, and embrace the large part of the injured hip, and extend it outwards in this form: now it will return to its place; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot bind it in this manner that we have said, then it behooves you to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the sick limb be extended two spans more than the other;
Then be suspended by the top of a pole, and let it be two arms' length above the ground; then command one minister to embrace the head of the hip, and let other ministers hanging with the sick person, who embrace firmly the hip, because the jointure now returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is at the back, let the sick person lie down, as we have said in one who has gout, and restrain one band on the sick limb properly, and on the foot also;
Then put two sticks, one at the head and one at the feet, then place a stick between the thighs of the patient in the shape; and have planted with drapes moistened around him so that it does not bleach the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and his eyes put equal in his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, it is good. If not, put him on a table and press him as we have said in the chapter on dislocations, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg as far as possible, and according to what I have said; and put his pain on the painful side with his hands, then press with the other hand, and the end towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the patient down or raise up the land, but rather he should be as though the hip was dislocated in the back, as we have said about childbirth on the two hips. And he should be on his face, and the tie extended as we have said before, and one must press upon the joint to the table.
And it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; therefore adjust the hips, and put on the splint, and the restraint of a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
And he rests for 3 or 4 days, then unties it, and puts on the splint again; and if you see that they are even, restrain it as before, and let him rest for 3 days; then unties it, and allows him to walk well, until the limb is strengthened.
Of the dislocation of the knee
The knee is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his hip, and if he does not rest at his hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg as much as he can, and place your back on his thigh, and put his foot on your feet.
Then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your two, then bend the two bones that make up the knee; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he will feel his leg lightly to his hip;
and put the plaster on top, and make the leg rest at the hip, and bind them together strongly for three or four days, then untie it; and let the patient not work to go, until the limb is strengthened.
And if the limb is not right, then administer strong extension, as we have said in the cure of the hip, until it is healed.
of the dislocation of the heel
The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and outside.
And the signs of it is that the ankle is swollen, and tender in front at the part where it is dislocated:
The reduction of it is light, and one should extend it gently with his hands when it is only bruised.
And when it is dislocated entirely, then you must make the patient sit straight, and hold him by one minister except for the leg, above the ankle;
then treat the foot with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then the foot is raised up, and push the foot well upward;
and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, begin the work again, because it will return;
and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stick one stake firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient;
Then have the ministers hold the patient's hip, and other ministers extend their foot to their hands or to one side, so that they lie upon the neck of the foot. Then have each minister stretch equally, and the straps be placed between the patient's hips to hold the patient when they are being stretched.
Then place the mirrors equally on the dislocation in their hands, and other ministers hold the healthy leg at the back, and the dislocation will return gently.
And when it is at point, apply the plaster and bandages on top, and strain them firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and ward the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the ligatures be not too tight.
then let it be for 2 or 3 days, and if the ligatures soften, then restrain it; then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and forbid the patient to move for 4 days. and if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess arises there, then it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healed.
of two
When the hips are dislocated, it is fitting to extend them well without effort, and this is a light thing.
And if the dislocation is in any joint of the back or foot, it behooves you to make the patient sit on one's flat surface or on a table perfectly straight, and put your foot upon what departs from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns.
And when it is aligned, and there appears nothing, put under the sole of the foot a table of two hands' width, then strain it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; and let him rest until he is sound.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is wanted to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and not hasty, nor bold;
and at the beginning of things apply soothing and lukewarm poultices, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health. and when you see hope [of recovery], then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess may come out.
and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things to the abscess hot, and treat the wound as it is necessary, with dried ointments;
and if the dislocation comes from a fracture, and small bones are displaced, set the bones, and do what we have said in simple ailments;
and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, because it brings you harm according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and body. Amen
