O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear children of mine, I have completed this book which is the final word on the science of medicine as a whole, and I have finished it with its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this book, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is dealt with in our region and is strange to all and every part, it is very rare in science and practice, and is not delayed by the little descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed and science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	I believe this to be alive with the order of this practitioner according to the path of exposure and statement and acceleration.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and of other instruments of the work, with the aid of the statement and preparation of him, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good master of hands is found in our times, the art of medicine is diminished.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who meddles in this should overcome in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of members, and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and the movement and moving veins and the resting and non-resting places, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this do I say that it is not good with the non-moist, and with work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and more often in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not knowledgeable about the things before mentioned should take care not to make a mistake and harm men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	since I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon themselves to it without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish man who pricked an abscess on the scrofula of a woman or on the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	So many deaths occurred that women died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another wonder, a stone carried by an elderly man; the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he took with him a piece of the bladder, and died honorable man within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have seen some who were called in to treat the patient and saw the condition of the disease and the size of the stone; and if they treated him, he would surely die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another wonder, a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the mirages of ignorance restrained the break over the wound as if by strong ligature, and left no scar on the wound, and left it thus; and so I finished;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commanded that he should not remove it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and he waited until the leg was completely healed and the wound closed, and came to perdition.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called upon to go to him, and I hurried to remove the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the ways of corruption were already confirmed in that member, and it cannot be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member as long as the members were completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder that will destroy the abscess and putrefaction, and then inflame because of the evil of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholy humor, does not come to an end except that one touches it with iron if it is in a suitable place so that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, fine children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work in which there is danger in many dispositions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each of the books of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For you must keep it so that the wrong man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	Take your weapons in agreement, undertake your ailments lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that, by the grace of God, you come to salvation and are freed;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the expectorable diseases of pain health.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and keep your arms away from that which makes you doubt, and have faith that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien adds in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on the care of a sick person unless you are called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are fire cauterizations and medicinal water cauterizations, and the chapters ordered of meat just until the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and forms of instruments, and iron tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapters are about cutting and drilling, and suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapters ordered and forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered that the heads of the bones be cut off, and the forms of the instruments be formed.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, let us remember the work; it is necessary that I give you the quality of aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of help, and harm, are the most distant words and subtle knowledge and secret responses have been said.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and of these many wise men spoke, and agreed upon this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And I am satisfied with few words, for I shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cauterization helps all complexions or it has matter, except for one complexion:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say complexion with heat and matter, and complexion with dry and matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a hot and dry complexion together with matter, they devised nothing and said that cauterization is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	what fire cautery is good for disease that comes from heat and thirst.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the natural power of fire, if it is hot, and should not be used to treat a hot disease by heat, nor by thirst;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and says that what opposes it does great help for a hot and dry disease that comes from within men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man with the fire's moisture to the skin, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all roads, don't meddle with fire except he who has experienced it and knows by long practice the chaplet of cauterizing, and the diversity of complexions of men, their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the remedies and space of time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other complexions we have no fear, nonetheless with cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the hair should come together and agree with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery together if there are secrets of healing, and much greater goodness than medical fire cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not hurt any other member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning remedies come from one member to another by removing, and bring to the member great relief of disease;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perhaps awaken the disease.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not produce this unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And I have found this by experience and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and I apologize for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that you should learn the secret of fire from another, and the quality of the work, how it dispels the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be made in what time they should be performed, and they should be prayed.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the harm that overtakes is due to the aid of cauterization;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and most often cauterization is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be put up with until the time when greater evil comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And I do not think ever, dear son, as they do so foolishly.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	For the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	and he should serve in this way;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but he does not know how to cauterize, for a cautery is only medicine that moves the complexion and dries up the humors that cause pain; and it is superior to medicine in terms of its swiftness, and because of its virtue and majesty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And they can achieve what the disease will do according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and they are gathered together in it the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where he has lost some excess and moisture, so that cauterization by the heat, and the similar things, and the pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this did not happen.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why the last remedies of medicine are called, and it is seen;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that the last remedies of medicine are worth anything, but their intentions are false, and this is a remedy of medicine because when we administer ways to cure in any disease and they don't work, then let us administer this remedy, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And so open well that the fire cautery is a medicine derived from the entrails, not according to the intention of foolish lookers.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that the gold instrument is more effective than the iron one, and they only mentioned the quality of gold and its high substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the fire of the cautery does not cause blisters, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and a gold cautery works better than an iron one, as they used to say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And anyway when you heat the instrument of gold, you are not yet when it is warmed by the color of gold, and soon cools down again;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is overheated;
si font au feu;	if heated in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	then there is sufficient obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery that we have made ready for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or vos ai ordeneit cet chapitre des lou chief jus'à piez, pour ceu que li voie soit plus legiere à trover.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery:
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is useful for a moist and cold forehead, and also for a multitude of problems in the hair, and in the ears, and for many kinds of headaches and pain in the jaw and throat, and especially for all manner of diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, swelling, apoplexia, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluable medicine which clears the head (III or IV), according to what the virtue and ease and the custom of the disease allow him to bear;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make ready the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make it sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on his chest;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	Afterwards, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and let your two hands come together, so that it bleeds from the bridge then heat the cautery which is called "oliver", of which this form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place your hand slowly and carefully, little by little, while moving it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then release your hand slowly, and feel the joint until you feel the bone just a little.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you don't feel it, start the fire again as I told you, until you feel the bone.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after, take a piece of string, put some cotton on it, and place it over the joint, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after, put some damp cotton on it.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave it on until the bone starts to hurt;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after, treat the wound with a poultice called "tetrarch", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And they say that as long as the wound is left open, it will heal faster.
et por ce si aide mues.	and so if they help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said the ancient that the longer a wound remains open, the more it will putrefy; and therefore if the fire should burn so much of the bone as to be consumed, then remove what is burned from the bone, and let it be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And so the other one that should be cauterized should be done with care on, and press so strongly it moves the bone as far away as I can put in a woman's vagina to get the humors out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and so the wound must remain open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after, one must cure and take care of it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases, except in some men where there is doubt.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should let him be.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witnesses in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even if the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first impression of cauterizing is more saved and softened for me, and I use it in such a way that it can be cured;
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old woman's pain with her head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in all the head comes chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient must use herbs and pills which are called "cochineals", and head purgation and oils and poultices.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if one does the cautery that we have spoken of above, and it is not useful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize him with fire a little as we have spoken above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After, make the fire cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the fire cautery where it is called "vessels";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and put them in places where ventouses are placed;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone at all:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	The patient feels an even greater amount of pain with this treatment than with others, and I will speak of it later on.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	And it is necessary that the corns be cut more finely than those from which one cuts the hair of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	To cauterize the head.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends all the way to the oil, and the shoulder is clean with medicinal oil, and all other treatments I mentioned in the section on diseases have been performed, then there is no benefit.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	Then it is treated according to two methods, namely with medicinal oil and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The medicinal oil treatment is done by prying open a tooth with a lever and then cutting off the bark and peeling it down to the bone in two pieces, and then applying it to the head where the pain is in one part, so that you can remove the bark from the leather.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is set back if the strapping and restraint are good and left so for XII hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then unbind it and treat with oil of garlic, and leave the wound for II or III days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put on cotton dipped in butter as long as it can be made to adhere;
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment with ointment as long as he is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that any of the medicinal preparations I have written about or one of the treatments for burning medicines are effective;
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the fire cautery so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a cloak or has a little curl, and is shaped in the middle to a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little bit, so that half of the heat of the cure is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and place your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is far away, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After putting cotton in a string, and placing it on the area for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put cotton wet with oil on it, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the cautery in front of the medicine and the fire does not suit it, then you must heat the cautery that is called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and so thus on the limb aching a line of half a foot long, and hold your hand once, and strain that you do not cover the artery and that you do not come to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jaw which moves when it is pulled, and the joint does not rest but shakes and spasm comes to the disease, and beware of the separation of blood from the artery when it is cut, or separation has great fear and more for those who do not know it, and who are not students and tested;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work in mid-air;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to strain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you at this place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this fire cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in mid-air as well as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapitre of extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has II knives;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that and more helping.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	for pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied the liquid medicines and other treatments we spoke of in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this poultice that is called "poins," which has this form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the ear on the sore side, or around the two sides where it hurts most, and moving away a little from the root of the ear then that you have found the place of the ache;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and there are X points inside each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After healing the place as long as it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be cured by cautery is only effective for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of illnesses;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and not to use cauterization for similar things that come from scorching and spam of nails.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you heal this similarity of torture that moves with fluid of water and purging of head and gargling, and this does not help, then it is good that you cauterize the disease with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little way back from the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the fire cautery in the healthy part, and make a fire cautery at the top of the ear near the corner of the head, and another in the temple as far back as one small finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the fire cautery there until half of the cur is burned away.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is how the fire cautery should be made:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the shape of the scalpel that we have described before, but it should be slightly thinner and the blade slightly thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After fire cauterizing as I have described above, until he is healthy again.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have described above, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four fire cauter
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	II under the two horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I put on the vastez as we have said before, and cautery to the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of chalk
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, give the patient many years and pills to clean out the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after all, remove the head of the sick person, and put on the scalp a plastron of saffron which is written or the preparation of plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	is this way to cauterize
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	So if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is healthy then, good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	And if he is not, then he shall have three cauterizations of the cut head descending as far as the collar, and two inches of space between each cauterization;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and the doctor does so as well, and if you see it wriggling, the patient is suffering, then do the fire cautery in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it is necessary, II others above the two horns, and the doctor until he is well;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and be the cautery that is called "oliver", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after washing the head of the sick person, then do the fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and behind and III on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more work to do, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then do four cauterizations on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let it burn until the hottest one is done, and lower your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the cure as long as he is healthy, and the cauterization which is called "olive" that we have mentioned above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of the epileptic should only use fire cauterization if it is phlegmatic; first, the brain should be cleaned of years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from pain.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the poultice, let him gargle and chew the head with boned meat often;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after the king has eaten rice in the middle, and I apply the poultice according to what we have said above, and I apply the poultice on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is far away and suffering, apply the poultice as I have said to those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the ribs on the spine of the back and neck, and apply the olive poultice according to the way I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, do a delicate cauterization according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, by reason of melancholy, there are excesses or corrupted wetness and thick fluid, then the cauterization is of parts as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, by reason of melancholy, the excess is declining into melancholy, and the patient's spinal fluid is moist, then give him to drink something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	after the king has eaten rice for the sick person;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after make a turban of linen well made, as well as a circle, if he puts it on the king's head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the sick person is placed, and well supported on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after presenting the linen, and dry with old butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it moderately over fire, so that the two may drink of it without suffering;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after vacuuming the circle from within by drawing up the head, and allowing it to cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the sick person every week with good governance, until he is well again.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you want to cauterize yourself by making many punctures all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This way of cauterizing wetttens the skull slightly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on cotton wet with butter and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first as long by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient purifying thing the head, and the ward of all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he has sat down again, and made a cauterization on his head, and made two cauterizations on his temples if he is disheartened at one time and not at another, or if one is disheartened and the other not;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and wrap all the fire cautery around all the veins and arteries that are exposed, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against the loss of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with a cloth so that it does not come out.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you how to stop the flow of blood during extraction of arteries and incision, how to stop it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	and never does one make a fire cautery or hurt while exposing the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the heart
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or choose the arteries that are in the appearance of the head from behind;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one can see that it is an excess of cold, humidificated things, then make the fire cautery that I said at the beginning of the descent of the tears:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the scalp, and I cauterize over the two temples, and I cauterize where the hair meets the bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	And if it is needed more, if the cauterize bleeds over the brow to all small cauterize.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears flow from the heart into the veins.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat it according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then just drink three nights' water.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After he has raised the scalp, and he makes a cauterize at the middle of the olive oil cauterize;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizes of the cauterize that is called "clavis" over the two brows, a little shaved on top.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	And guard the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "oliva
de coi ci est li forme:	So that you know how to make this form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, make two cauterizes over the two brows as long as the brows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not let go of my hand except that as long as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that drips oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Until such time as the hair of the oils is turned into the parched skin, and they grasp the oil, then do I make cauterizations according to two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient into your care;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure which is also like the feather of the pine tree, and is the beginning of the sign of the hair;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	and then I dip cotton in wax and musk in oil on the palm of my hand, then heat the cauldron so that this is its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterizing the figure you have marked little by little many times, that the scar be burned in place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper退退, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then raise your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then I dip cotton in wax until the heat is hot;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And when these come, and the paper is soft then start again the cauldron in the middle, as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and when the hairs are gone, if the cauterization is done so that the paper returns to its natural position, and is even, and does not touch the hair to the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The medicine's fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a laurel leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	and take French soap and hot salt, each one of them 1/4 ounce, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it carefully so that it doesn't cool down, then in the same manner as you made the shape of the laurel leaf, put the hairs on the parchment;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease only affects one side, then treat it alone, and also treat the other side;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and dip cotton wicking in oil that's moistened with alcohol;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and if the patient is in your presence, then hold the head of the disease towards the medicine, and press it gently and frequently so that the patient feels heat from the medicine, because they also feel heat like fire;
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	As you have done for so long, if the medicine sticks to your tongue.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the mortification has passed, then raise up the place of aw, and note if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then put back the medicine on the place where it has not worked, as long as your hairs are long and even, and your eyes held fast;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on cotton dipped in oil as long as the curative is hot, after treating the place of the wound that is called "dyaferens" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must guard your wound well, by great care so that it does not break out with the medicine's hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after it, and the hairs grip in the oil, then begin again the medicine on that place which is softened by the paper properly, in the same way as you have done before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the cure as long as he is healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the shape of the funnel of the milky way:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this they are constrained;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and is not reused straight way to him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For the cure of a fistula by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the hair of his head between your hands so that it does not move or fall;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after wet a cotton ball in wine or juice of cherry on oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heat the cautery which is sharp;
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and place it on the head like a feather of a dove, so that the tip of the cautery is:
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you can see, if you point from one head to the other, and if you cannot see, if it is like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but all the same, he who is the master of the craft must move according to your need.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After pressing, the fistula has been opened and treated, and it is dried up;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, so that he works, and treats it furiously;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after putting the fire cauldron in place, and holding your hand over the cauldron at the part of the neck above the oil, so that your hand does not go mad;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the fire cauldron in the oil grease, and spoil it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the cauterization just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then restart the cauldron again once more, and if you need more, let it lie for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	afterwards I put cotton soaked in oil on it, and the cure of the drying ointment until it is well, and if it is well for forty days, then put the corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and let him rest according to what he came to his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way of cauterizing fistulas, which no one of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Hear a pipe, and seal the hole;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Then put in the edge I have a subtle instrument so that it is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and I make in the quantity of one .Z. of pound;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand firmly, and do not move the patient so that the pound does not run into its oil;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary that one put on the oil to the patient wet in a basin of water or in a vat:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the pound so as to close the hole of the fistula, and he is healed by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have spoken of, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, then it is necessary to give a pound to the nose, and to bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what one should do in his own place.
des crevaices en levres	crevasses on lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	The mouth sometimes causes crevices in the lips, which are called "hair," and sometimes in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then a small surgical cauterization is performed according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put him firmly in those crevices until it comes up to the edge;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	After he has cured the head of cerotomy as long as he is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess from the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess forms at the root of the throat or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth after a pustule has rotted and fallen away and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you have fire cauterization according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the piercing or opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes out from the bottom, and behind it;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice after the treatment we have said above, until he is well;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is cured in this way, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, then uncover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in his ointment.
dou movement des dens	dou movement des dens
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the teeth are softened by moisture and the gums move, and you cure it with medicine and that does not work, then put the head of the sick in your healthy one;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After heat the cautery so that its form will come out later in a certain way so that you put a chain on the teeth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and place the hot cautery inside it carefully, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the teeth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After remove your hand and start again the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and leave it for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is stabilized, and the gums that were softened are tightened, and the moisture that corrupts is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When the toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or swelling, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to perform the cautery according to two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and cautery with butter and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	with butter cautery is such that you squeeze butter from a cow, and the tip into a teaspoon of iron or gold.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and squeeze it into butter, and put it on the aching tooth gently and keep it until it has cooled down;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and then often as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see if moist wool and cotton in butter freeze, and put it on the aching tooth, and put it on hot iron until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The combined fire cautery is such that you squeeze a iron or gold wire, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	then heat the cautery, so that it comes out as follows, and put it on the tooth and keep your hand until the cautery has cooled down;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Make it often, for the pain will be worse the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter before applying the fire cautery, and then swallow it.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery on the patient's lips that you desire, and according to your ability;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	This is the form of the needle:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the boils are of cold moisture and do not respond to medication, then heat the needle so that there is an opening for the fumes to come out from the one side of the cautery and go out through the other side;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if there is an abscess, make a cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and with cotton wet with oil until the burn has healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treating with ointments and poultices until it is healthy.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture overtakes the skin of the shoulder, and most importantly when it comes from cold temperature, then the patient should be emptied first by giảipharmacological means;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after you have made a cautery at the root of the throat, and keep away from the throat, and only add a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you have made another cautery at the joint of the neck at the base of the spine, and let the cautery that is called "clave" take shape in front of us;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the wound as we have said above until it is healed.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all illnesses are caused by cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, but is an old disease, then make cauterization on his legs with fire .II cauterize at the roots of the hair;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cauterization pour out the milk between the breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cauterization which is called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been said above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see it, make a cauterization by poking at all the cauterization that is called "poins" so that the shape is as said above in the illness of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the pokes be only up to XXX, or until it hurts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After care according to this which is before said, and let the cauterization be to three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these are lighter cauterizations, because you do them in three at a time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, make the patient lie on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After remove the ring which is inside the tickle, as you must do with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated from within, then heat the fire which has two ends, this is the shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the ring as far as it pierces the skin, and came the figure of the fire together with four cauterizes;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this one is made cauterize with the fire which has three ends, for the figure of cauterization are four cauterizes;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerve according to the subtility of a thread and this is the shape of the fire which has three ends:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And no time is placed on this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the fire for melt with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After let rest the patient, and do not move the members by long time until it is well conforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, what thing comes out, then do cauterization on the thick part of the cautery, or many cauteries pierce it.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And because the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and moisture as it is drawn away from its color, and multiplies the cataracts to him, and is mannered in the usual cures and does not benefit, then the patient should be placed on his back, and his legs and hands extended.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	From now on after the fire make three cauterizations of the hand with the blade of the pis per quantity of two, for all cauterizations clawed, and two cauterizations distant the two sides so that the form of the cauterizations is at three angles, and there be a space between each one and another so that they are not joined together when they move rottenness;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterization be so perfect that it burns both parts of the hand, and the form of the cauterizations is according to this form without stirring:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever is afraid of this cautery, cauterizes by piercing and signing on the stomach in i. point according to the quantity that you see of one inch;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize all the cauterization which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the cure we have had before, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it comes with pain from cold and moisture and a great windiness, as long as it is excessively removed from its natural state by the excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	And the patient is cured of what we have said in the divisions, and it does him no good, unless he becomes sullen on his hemorrhoids;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and the sign of three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, let the hips be spared, for from which comes the cut of the womb;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be space between each cauterization equal to the girth of a thumb;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauterization of the long neck, and do not press out much blood with one hand at all the cauterization;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and be burned only halfway through the cure, and let the patient lie on his side;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him lie down on his side, and extend his legs, and lift up his breasts.
et c’est li forme:	This is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterices of the cutlery, if you are subtle and wise in this art, and beware that you do not burn all of it, for you would parch all the body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not come to a boil, because the meat is very subtle in place, and your eyes to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When he has an abscess in the liver, and you can know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the sacking;
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, then the patient's pain will not be too great;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the sacking, then the pain will be very severe.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And so when this treatment was finished, if the patient began to sneeze, then he needs to rest on his head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign with your hand at the place where the abscess is, and then heat the fire cautery that looks like a rod, from which comes this shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize it as long as the wound is burning, and come up to the top, so that the skin is all burned;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of abscesses until he is well;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not necessary to use any fire but those who have studied medicine for a long time in the art of medicine, and by which these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And cauterize I cauterize until the wound is burned, and comes up to syphac, until the scar is completely healed; after the cure according to the cure of the abscesses until it is healthy; and only one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by which many diseases have been corrupted no time.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The old ones said that one must do with root of aristologue, and in this way too:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristologylong, the largest that you can find, and dry it, and also make it as long and as thick as your two fingers;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and the gurgling in oil, and hold by fire, cautery cautery between the jaw and the throat, and two small cautery one little cautery going down to the part that is soze the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two small cautery one little cautery between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining behind a little;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery under the penis, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two ribs above the back of the cautery that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not squeeze my hand, but make it open widely as when you are smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And no old man uses fire cautery like a razor, and they sweep it and put it between the ribs until it comes to the abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and wait for the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out that cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse according to what we have said in the division of the cures, and it does not benefit, then they took three ways of cauterizing which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	III or IV cauteries, or according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery which we have said above.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient sit down on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way to cauterize that you heat the cautery which has 2 nails, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and place the knife which is at the mouse's end, where the cut of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation that you make with the knife be according to the knife, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	Afterwards, you will pour the 2 nails that are on fire until the knife is pricked from the other side, and then take the cautery away quickly, and thus there will be III.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, cauterize all the cauterizations at three nights.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the patient has been infected for a long time, and it is clear that one of the two cures mentioned earlier is needed, then it is necessary to try both at the same time.
de ydropisie	About dropsy.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 cautery does not work for droves, except in the way called "asclepiades".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you have cured it according to the ways that we have said in the divisions, and your cure is not successful, then it is necessary that you do four cauterizations around the boude, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one behind the back on the spine, and one place on the pis;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterization be well placed near the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	Afterwards, leave the cauterization uncovered for a long time, and do not leave the cure of the patient uncovered after the cauterization;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and the healing would hurry, and the two intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cauterization for the stomach is the key that we have before described;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and its two sides are olive-colored, according to what has been said above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the parts
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in the person who is hydropic and are pale yellow in color, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the cauldron without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, lest the pale yellow be burned, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After, make two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the scalpel;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauldron be long, one behind the knee in front and the other before, between the leg and the thigh;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauterizations on for a long time without washing, so that the blood comes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After the treatment described above, you can then proceed with other treatments which we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues retain and digest that are in the stomach and in the intestines are affleurant, and cannot be cured by methods of treatment;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do I grant cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, with the circulating cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauteries around the navel with small needle-like cauterization, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make fire cautery on the knuckle, and I make cautery on each finger, and II small cauterizes in the stomach to take away the great one, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and are large cold and moist corrosion, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and does not benefit, so do cauterize:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	and III on the spine of the back, that which is all from away is seared little by little in tripling, and I sear the navel two times;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling of the face, then the face is seared with cauterization as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the cheek, at all cauterization with needle-like cauterization;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the fire cautery long ten.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care, let him rest as long as he is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charred flesh which is called "thela
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the skin, if you heat the fire cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut skin;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and I leave so long my hand that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, from which it does not move away;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is blood from the skin, then cauterize it each time as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment with beneficial oils as long as they are healthy;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large fire cautery on the skin, it will be more effective.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear to have the wound lanced or opened, which we will tell you in your place, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no outlet for the blood, and it has risen and become thick with pus and moisture, then you must try to provide a small passage for it, and be careful that you know how much of the remedy is perfect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heating the fire cautery that seems like a razor, and then pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that it has entered, and then restart the cautery as long as those cors are burning and corrupting, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity of the bespitting;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and protect against deep nerve injuries, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	it may cause a fistula in the middle of the bladder and intestines, so protect these parts, and never cut through the flesh, and think that it is not permanent;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after healing the wound as long as it is healthy, and if the members are broken, and the matter has been solid for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the matter has not become solid, know that the wound is twofold, and the bone is rotten at the root;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and in this way as we will say about one of these.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When the cold pain comes with rain and strong wind, and does not respond to a woman's treatment, then you must use the fire cautery on both sides of the rain as we have said before;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize them with milk, then there will be three cauterizations in a row, and they will be more effective.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make cauterization in the lower part behind the bladder, where the hair of the testicles grows, and one on each side, and let each cauterization be as long as a fingernail;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and I make cauterization behind the back, where there is tickling;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let each cauterization be claw-shaped according to the shape described above.
de la marris	of the urinary tract.
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are withered and their termini are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	So then it is fitting that he has III cauterizes in the loins, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizes for the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauterize be claved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the pelvis of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and it is found that the department of the pelvis is wet, so it is fitting that you cauterize the patient on the pelvis with I cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the place in the circle around the pelvis as it turns, so that the pelvis is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if it be such cauterizes as those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if you do not have this ointment, make three ointments of the great olive, and let these ointments be also perfect as all the curers.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When the pain comes in the hip box, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of that which we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	Then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After this make a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the way of the cautery should be according to two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery if it is according to many ways, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	You shall cauterize the hunchback's back with three triangular cauters according to this form, and do it with great depth and wide space between each cauterization, having the cauters olive-sized.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	No time is spent cauterizing in the middle on top of the hunchback's hump, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if you cauterize with a circular cauterizer as we have said before in the dislocation of the hump.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	However, do it in such a way that the circle contains all the hump, and let all the meat be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach up to the thigh or up to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there where the patient feels pain, and one above the ankle with three parts; on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery of the teeth, and let the thickness of the cure be burned.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or four points or eight points in the cautery called "points
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the profession is done, he does it more
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he feels that the pain is in his knee and goes up towards his thigh, you make a dental cautery or circular cautery, and be sure to keep all your cauteries so that you do not leave them on for too long, burning the nerves and large arteries, and causing the patient no more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have done cauterization on the heel of the foot, and left them so much that the leg was all twisted, and the toes as well, and they were pierced and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution to the belly from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization in one and the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say in the cautery of the hach, how it should be done, make it so thick or less thick as a fingernail, or a little less, and between the fingers and between each finger a space as large as a nail.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the bars of the harness be over two parts, and let them also be like knots, and there is one hand with iron well made;
et c’est li forme:	This is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is all red and hot, and then put it on the box of the sick hip, and turn it around the lower back;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize once again, and let it rest for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure of ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasius says that we use little of this cautery because of its fear of his breath, and who uses it little;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and however good this is a cauterizer, who can bear it, and where he afflicts himself.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	For the hot medicine cautery, if you make an instrument between which [the margin] of the hole is, and of rain or iron to a long wall, and in height it has two of us, and between each the quantity of the thickness of a dove;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and are above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After you have put on the box of the hip to the lying patient on his back it is in order, and press your hand very much on the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you have cut out between the two circles of hot wax that is heated in a pot, and let it rest for an hour, and suffer the patient the heat and the pain of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it gives a burning taste also as fire does;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the taste has passed away, you take your hand with the instrument and raise the hip of soft wax, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter as much as that which is black from the scorching is taken away;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him leave three days to perspire in this way;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the following help after the treatment of onions as long as it is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, make the instrument that you hold according to what you did in the hip gradually;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the way of hot water, and I have written or treated of the correction of medicines.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or there is a small opening where the point of a rasp enters;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place there another pot that can be well plugged with ash, and put on alkali and warm water and soft water, until there are two cups of powder that you have well mixed in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until it has become very thin with water and ash, then take all of this water, and pour it over alkali and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then if it will be wet and is treated with a medicine's excess and other members' cauterization.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs the same work as fire does, and if with other medicines one cauterizes well the wound with a mixture of thistle, myrrh, and salt mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a remedy in which a noble man was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic leg, and he drank it, and said that another did not cure him, but he was healed in one soul when this remedy was made, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it is said that you squeeze green and dry lead with a little fat, and put it on the wound and leg or thigh where the pain holds, and leave it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and he leaves it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the heat.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bath as long as his body is a little warm, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away all and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, except after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Diachorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat hair, it helps a lot;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and this cauterization must be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another, and oil it well, and put it on the crease that is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called a flick.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After take dry goat hair, and hold it in fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it is burned;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and again try, and do not stop doing so as long as you think sensible that it comes up to the thigh, and that the pain is stopped;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterize of goat".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain at the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by sitting down or by pounding, or by too great an evacuation, or by the appearance of expanded cold material, no one of these appearances is worth cauterizing, except that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is appropriate that after the patient has voided any foul pills or similar things, you do it on his back, where the pain persists, three lines signed with an inch, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and be done cauterization according to the cauterize which is called "poins";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, do three cauterizations or four at the cauterize with a blade according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the sign of the beginning is that they have tight posture when they stand up, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find in the back of the spine of the two and in us the appearance that comes on top of the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you see him healed, if he is cauterized with the cauldron of fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	Let the fire cautery each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, then cauterize around the spine with a piercing cautery two or three lines, and let the burns be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After cure the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply cauterization to a ganglion that is in a nerve's spine.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the joints hurt from moisture that spreads to each limb of the body, and when the pain comes in pieces, which the people properly call "gout," and when it is from a cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauterization in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the fire cautery inside the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary for you to hold on the face of the foot, make a fire cautery with all the fire cautery that is called "no point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come only to the knees and to other joints, and it happens many times, make cauterization on each knee with three cauterizations or four of each part, all with olive oil cauterization;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have more work to do, if you make it more, but do not hold your hand firmly except when the spine of the knee is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have spoken about in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, then make a point to enter the fingers two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains any pain in both, then make a point on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come just as the cuts or just as the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good government to the patient and apply remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you do good management and you purify the pus, then you will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	about the surgery of the sick
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When a rupture occurs in the face, and the flesh falls down to the bones and is newly happened, so that when you cure him, he should not rub himself any more;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and let him use things that cover his belly, so that the end may come off his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after he has made himself sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to let his hair grow until the boil is healed, and brings it to your hands, and signs from one side of the wound on the bone with the fingernail, and all that looks like half a circle above the neck;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then heat up the cauldron of which this is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it seems solid.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then put the balls back in their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the assistant dyes his hand so that it does not turn back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and operate well on the patient's legs, and put a cloth and an assistant on his legs, and another on his feet that will dye his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cauldron on his signet ring on all your hand, and keep it in place until you reach the bone, and if you don't hit it the first time, try again a few more times until you do;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful that the flame does not escape when you operate with the cauldron;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so you don't burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and so that by chance the patient doesn't die, or any other harm is done.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come only to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautters of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also great according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days cure leu the fire cautery so that the ostentation is cured;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the cure other treatments as long as he is healthy, and lay the patient on his back for 40 days with the wound well soldered;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that its renewals be prolonged, so that the boil does not rise when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is given to him, and it is applied for another 40 days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and has good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against high-pitched yelling;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he has taught this instruction, then he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in his chalk.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the uterine rupture
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When wounds come in other bellies and are connected, and you see that they no longer grow, then you make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of it.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the above said that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first the sign the place of the navel and make a line through the largeness on the rupture, and another away from it, and all your hand in every cauterized claw.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizes are lighter and softer.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in no member, or from sitting or from hurting, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not useful, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with fire which is called "poins", and make the cauterize according to the length of the member and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of torments and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed with the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	this name, begin another cautery on top of that one, for the custom is that it must grow in the member closest to him, so that you make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from healing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The meseile are not aided at all by cautery, nor do the diseases arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy alone.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	If you see that the disease is at the beginning, and it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not stop or stay, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the whole disease, then you make five cauteries on top:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I cut off the head at the neck, and the other goes to the front at the end of the hair.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and I behind at the back on the nape/neck;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave it so that the fire cautery comes to the bone, and so that the wind/steam of the bad humors can come out,
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and I cauterize on the top according to what is in front of it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if it gets mixed everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and it loses clearly, if you set the fire cautery that we have spoken at the head, and I cauterize on its neck, and II cauterizes on the spine of the back/neck, and VI cauterizes on the spine of the back/neck, and I great one on the top/skull, and another small one, and II on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and 2 on the knives, and 2 on the tendons of the foot, and 1 on each joint of the hand and the foot, and on the creases of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are above the knees when you stand, so as not to burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and do not make any fire cautery on the bone of the hand, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more fire cauteries I make, the more help I give, and the more benefit it brings;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the patient does not feel pain at the fire cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already so corrupted;
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great or small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After care let him sit with flour of times with honey and other cures as long as he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When the swelling comes on any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then you must make fire cauteries on the member according to its size and smallness;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization go a little way into the flesh of the back.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the doctor applies ointments as long as he is well.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And do not apply fire cauterization to the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that disposes the member, and thus if it is fractured;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in no way does one interfere with them unless one knows the members and outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of albaras
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease that is called "albarias" is awakened, and the medicine of it is useless, then let the cauterization be made with a small fire cautery, according to the quantity of flesh of the back, until the blotch is moved, and its color is changed;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then the doctor applies flour of times and lentils with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of turtle and blood of almond, each a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and keep them in place until they are well.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for syphilis by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the itch begins to appear, and you see it stopping, if you cauterize with a fire cautery that seems like a circle, all around the itch's circumference.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And moreover, the surgeon should tell you to make a fire cautery at the center of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and moreover, this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it come about;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the most right thing is that it be cauterized from within, at the cautery that is called "circular", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When anyone has a disease that is called "adebelati", and it delays dying or because of the excess blood that it makes or because of the eagerness of the sick person when he is very old (that is to say, too much) and he has little blood, or because of the age;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see him hasten to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize it with small caustics while pricking;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she is eager to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce it throughout the whole cautery, let the cautery be very hot.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has penetrated the cure, and is such a cauterization that the patient feels the heat in some way that the course of the pus is controlled.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing other than a putrid mass of a member, because it corrodes the members as much as the fire dries up the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see a disease in which there is suffering, cauterize it together with fire, then heat the caustics little and much, according to what is good for the place where the disease is located;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards cauterize all of it until you are exhausted with the corruption, and there is nothing left of it, so that all that is corrupted is burned up.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the burned areas oil to soothe them with as much as the burns of fire are healed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of onions that generate heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if after three days a healthy scar does not appear, this is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then start cauterizing again on the part that has remained corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this blister should never be cured with water medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but all the way fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure of the acute medicine in division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come to the tips
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	For sometimes it happens that at the tips by default a disease is born which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large infected thing that bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cauterization and water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery also is like a pen of a vault, and must be made of good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and that there are subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after you have put it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail as far as it comes to the tip of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it stay like this for three days until it begins to move by itself;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make an ointment of wild mulberries crushed with salt, and let the ointment be on it all night, and the nail will come out and will be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the infected area with poultices until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are converted by many delays of the heart, and often happen to the hands and feet, it is necessary that you bring them fire cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	and in this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a nail of iron or steel, or a feather of pigeon, and put it on the claw and the toe, that is to say, to cure warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the nail on it so that it burns all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand firm, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the nail comes to the root of the claw, and may find the hot water way deep to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and suffer the patient a little pain of the hot water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it in that state, and it will come off at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make an after another, as long as you draw out all those who are in the body, then cure the pains that generate heat.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When there is a trembling from cold, or fever, or any other illness, then you must make four cauterizations or three on the spine of the back and one between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one at the feet, and one on the stomach with olive oil cauterization;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	if it will stop shaking, and quickly heal from cold illness.
des pustules puans	pustules that emit pus
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No one appears on the body by way of sweat, or pustules that emit pus, which come from corrupt humors.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	If it is necessary for the first time that cauterization be made on each head of the pimple:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a fine tip from a fir branch, so that it catches fire, or from a root of arzila long, or with a spherical cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never make the cauterization at the beginning, according to this method, and they cannot grow anything bad before that, but the excess is broken off, and they are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this is done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 often occurs great disturbances of blood from the artery that is cut to the wound that comes to the surface, or incision of the abscess, or cautery of the member, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very bitter thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And whenever one has any, if you quickly put your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it as much as the blood is quietened by your finger, and that drop no longer comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then set on fire the olive oil caustic with small and large ones as long as they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then take some, or large or small according to the wound and its location, considering that the artery is cut, and put the caustic on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the caustic in place until the blood is stopped;
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if he pricks when you lie on your back, and the cauterization has ended, then take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing one after the other until the sun is extinguished.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is dear, and that another ill will not come upon the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when the sun is cut short of the artery, one cannot well stop it flowing even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet treated, or by a strong knot of thread, or by medications put on which have the power to stop the flow;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and let him lie and be held fast together.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who can bring about a good healing of him tightly bound in fabrics or placing burning things on, or other similar things, if it does not help, then do not do it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and he has neither seen nor applied medicine, then he should put his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and hold it tightly until it is stopped flowing on the wound and on the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move his back, but wet it with cold water often as long as the sun is hot so that it freezes and thickens and hardens.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make incisions in front of those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the remedies for surgery.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cauterization, burning medicines, and the causes and instruments and forms of cauterization are needed;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have put that head of the shoulder on the ground, and I will go through this chapter in this middle way for those who are dislocated more lightly than those who are broken;
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you do not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the manner of men come in cures.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	where there are people who have so much fear of their disease that they die easily from the effort of trying to get rid of it, and from the great magnitude of their illness;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these we must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And from these I will tell you the story, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am old;
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not appropriate that you grant consent to those who come to you with this behavior, but rather put more trust in your honor than in your convenience, and do not open widely but carefully from him of whom you are certain, and from whom you might have received something and taken it at a distance;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use divination and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health may be restored.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and who will help you achieve great renown, glory, and memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you will, may you seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizes, which I have devised from the head down to the feet, so that you may find more easily that of which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The water is full of taste.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	I know that this disease often occurs in children when the child's throat is too strongly constricted.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and it never happens because of a repeated response, which one cannot predict.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those who have it die quickly;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for me it seems that I should be more careful in performing the treatment.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with fluid, and whose head grew heavy each day until it could no longer be supported;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and he believed that he was dying because the moisture had gathered so much that it entered between the skull and the bone, between the jaw and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and if they are such that the moisture is between the joint and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you shall split through the head a wide split;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and so far as we, until the moisture runs;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and put this in the form of a spikelet:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the manner of a cross according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is out of the bone, and you see the signs that the head of the spine is split on each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand, and it does not close back down:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then you shall split through the head three splits according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract the moisture all at once.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After, hold the splits covered with cloth and powder, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then let it dry out, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head be extracted evenly, and give the patient dry meat that does not have moisture as much as the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another way of incision is that you look at where the large size of the abscess, and the gathering of the sharp.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For it is never before;
aucune fois derrier;	it is never behind;
aucune fois en destre;	it is never on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	it is never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	So size where the abscess opens, and the filling of the sharp, and do as you can do it;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard against covering the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and give him blood, so that the patient dies of blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In conclusion...
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	If a person has a disease called "cough," and the illness is old, and the benefit of medicine is not there, then the final remedy is to cauterize with what they will block the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, when you see them covered, for the patient to raise his head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	afterward rub the neck with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, and then extract the patient's collar from all the cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	Then look at where the vein enters, and their leys [veins] from one side to another are after the ears, and few are answered.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then mark the veins at the nape of the neck, and cut them both from one side to another with a small chisel  [spatumile] until the bone is reached, and that may be done by means of a broad chisel at the back of the neck.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, bottle the sperm of cows from the vein and the skin above, carving too much like I should on a tree.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, let it flow continuously upwards without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery is not felt at the touch, then you must measure the quantity of space of three fingers, and then sign the nape and cut to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	And if it is necessary to put the blood on fire then there are six inches [6/8 inch], and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the repetition of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If it remains on the bone of the sciatic joint, if the copes that aposteme [abcess] don't come out, then extract the wound and wrap it up, and the treatment of the wound until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old man's hair begins to gray, and he has catarrh due to the moisture of tears and heat in his temples and aged skin and similar things, he is treated with medicine by means of remedies for medicines and none of them benefit him, if we extract the arteries from his temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair grow again on his temples, and hears the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not too quickly extracted except in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	And if it is extracted, then the patient removes his clothes, and rubs the place with no rough cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the sputum of where this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then tie it up tightly like pinches, and remove the webbing that are between each part of it;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if his arteries are thin, then turn it to the point of the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of II shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not covered, then does not save all in all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And treat the blood of the VI /, until III;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if his arteries are large, then you must thread them with a strong double silk thread, so that blood does not come out before the wound is healed, and comes out again after the blood has come out;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the surplus that is between the two threads at that same moment, and then, if you see it, with the cautery cutellaire, as far as the bone as soon as the shoulders are cut;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and that is the operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterization is done to end the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For by fire it is more helpful against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	For in the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with fine cotton cloth and put it on well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are removed, let there be dry medicine that makes a chime, and of tents, until he is well;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and without any wound of the artery as you perform it, if you hasten to cover it with fire, or you employ the place of vitriol and extract it with your hand so that the wound is closed;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have fire present, if you put your finger on the place until the wound is frozen, and dip the place in cold water again and again, and extract it as it should be done;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and the one that is wet and lighter in weight for the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein from both sides, but let the cutting be well done so that it lasts longer on heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have tied up the two ends, and you rub hot iron on it until it comes out to the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and be separated between the two shoulders because it is not souded with this fire cauter of all things;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	this is the form of the cauter:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes come down from the veins that are on the forehead of the head of fire, and it does not benefit from medicine that is done to it, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and feel a feverish tremor as if it were shivering;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and the oil is tenacious and moist so that the hair of the scales falls off, and the scales are burned, and scorched by the heat of the tears, so it is necessary to have this cure;
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the ancient "cure for cuts", and this is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his or her hair: make three cuts even along the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the cuts should also be like two, all the way down to the forehead until it reaches just below the nose, and the other two cuts are on either side of the forehead above the temples, and you must not cut into any arteries that are above the temples.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and remove your hand from the lower part of the two mandibles, and each wound should have three doses joined together;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have ready a sponge and motted cloths to wipe away the blood, then dip the sponge in both sides of this form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is supposed to be on the temple until the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and scrape off all the flesh that is between the two cleavages entirely to the bone, and then do the same from the first incision until the second, and then draw out this blade forcibly.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you add water to the first cut of the instrument called 'charnel', and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the edge of the cutting tool toward the cheek at the corner, and let the edge be soft toward the bone, and dip it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And scrape off all the scales that descend from the head to the flesh until the incision is continuous up to what opens at the cleavage, and then do the same in the middle cut until the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw out the blood evenly, and press on the vein so that the blood comes out;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	and then put in each cut a tent of wet linen, and place drapes soaked with wine and oil and vinegar on them, and watch so that the abscesses do not leak;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and for the third day let him lie in bed, and I will bring a great amount of fresh water, then the remedy with basilicon oil mixed with rosewater, and other remedies that are used to heal wounds, until he is healed.
dou reume des eulz	To keep hair long and even.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there is no catarrh by habit, and you see the hairs thin and short, and weakening of sight, and burned paper.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and where it grows in there is sharp pain in the patient, and he coughs up phlegm;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Therefore, because of these accidents, it is clear that this matter and this catarrh do not come from many veins, but from one; and the remedy that is given to him, if it is this one, then it is right.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to rub his forehead, then make a deep incision in his forehead, and another one from left to right.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begins with the incison on the left temple to the right temple, and be the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when one chews;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is uncovered, so suck all the blood with a sponge, and then tie between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool, and bandage it with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	and then hang them over a drape soaked in wine and oil, and keep them warm from the abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is extracted, if you rub the bone as much as it begins to bleed, then treat it with dried things, which cause dry matter to form.
En teil maniere:	In this way:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	Take 2 parts of flour from bread, and 3 parts of colophony, and make an ointment;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	And apply it to these wounds to cause dry matter to form everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the bumping of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All those who have an ear are one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grain, or beast, or a small stone, or similar thing as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, if like peas, beans, or peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or flowing thing if like water and easy to move, and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is in the ear a stone or some other thing that does not fit into the ear, and does not enter it, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if there is no drop of violet oil or oil of sweet marjoram, then apply extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and let it sweat from heat, and it stops the nostrils when the sweating comes, and puts around the ear pieces of linen or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and let the ear be up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Mouth times a great remedy comes;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out strongly, then he is given extraction with subtle pincers, for the form is:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out strongly with the pincers, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then extract with the small sharp tool;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if not with the sharp tool, then make a small hole in the ear canal or pierce the ear lid firmly, and stop the one who is inside the canal with soft wax so that it does not come in with the cannula;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then let him sweat strongly, for many times it comes out strongly as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come in some way, so take the glans, and place in some certain instrument that is right for this, and put a little cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glans on stone or something, and practice well.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come out with all of these things we have said, then you must hurry to cut the ear in such a way that the abscess comes out and spasm;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the way of the cut if you do first save the patient from the head injury, and remove the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small cut at the root of the ear onto the fat or where it depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be like a moon, as far as you come to the stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it gently into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as long as he is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a tooth that hurts and swells, then administer an extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if he cannot spit, then administer a thin spit-like substance according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and incise that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not use this when you think that the tooth is moist due to moisture in the ear, as many times as you have used it;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with thin tweezers and with a pick, as we have said, so that the extractions are ordered.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water, then, when he spits in his ear, the patient should use an elder's cough first, and widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful about that ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it falls there, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	Or if not, then take several pearls according to the length of your finger and make them light, and heat them a little by the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and put the patient a little pearl in his ear, and cut off one of his other teeth, and fix it with another stone on the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to make a stone on top of a stone until the water comes out completely, and so it all jumps up completely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, then take one joint, and dip one of the ears in water, and the other head burn with fire until the longer joint is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make another part of other joints until the water comes out completely, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the arrow, if it is a small one, like a flea or a similar thing, treat it as we have said in the dislocation.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is a big one that can be felt, then arrange for the extraction of pincer-type things;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the dislocation and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear towards the sun;
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there is no opening, if the trail is small pinches, and if it does not open, take the grip of where this is the shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it must be tight below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And pour out the thinnest chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck all the form:
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this often as much as the whole blood comes.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not submit to be taken out, then stop it with cotton in the ear as I said in the stone:
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or the treatment of the distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, where this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And of silver or gold are you made, of small holes, and above them for distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press into the instrument of silver made well for this, and you take the razor and wrap cotton around the tip facing forward;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then you pour your oil or juice, and what you take of your medicines in the line, and the line is in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then pour into the razor all of the cotton, and press your hand slightly while distilling or moving the oil out of the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient smells inside, and the distillation is a little heated like this so that it is distilled in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the bumping of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who does not have small holes in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and these same things happen to the ears because of the piercing of a wound or of a needle going into the ear, and this piercing sometimes comes out completely from the ear, so that one cannot see it.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and never does the hole go deeper than the eye can see.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which has come out completely, so that one cannot see it, is a serious wound for many people, and in this case, you should put the patient's ear in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the operation clearly, if the wound has already been cleansed of its pus, and here is the shape:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be smooth and clean in front and behind, so that it doesn't hurt the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the wound is a needle or a pin stuck in the ear, if there are only few small wounds, and clean it lightly, until the needle is completely out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the swelling is completely in the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly on the fire, and then put the bar of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the swelling that causes the patient earache, then do so lightly and be careful not to injure the ears.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put in the ear a small piece of felt according to its size, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not do this every day until the wound is healed, but take a small piece of felt and moisten it with rosewater, and powder with vitriol brew.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	And if you see the ear drain, so that you take out the felt and remove another felt moistened with rosin oil, which is made of rosewater and wax, until the swelling has subsided;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes, dip a sponge and a cloth in cold water and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that the doctor uses to relieve the pain which are or to treat the distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper pile
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	Apply hot water to the hair when they are moist and dry, so that you pull them with nail files and tweezers, and cut off a small piece of their roots;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	And then put on top of the vinegar.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it is not peeled, then the fire cautery, with the subtle lens-shaped cautery, and the fire cautery after incision makes the muscles move.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often repairs, so that nothing remains attached to its roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And when they are cauterized with fire, if the roots are burned and do not return again.
de la gresle	of the grate
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Often come in papers some hairs that seem like grumous things in their form and dureness, and for this reason this disease is called "grinald", and is a mass of moisture thick in the paper on top and inside;
li ovraiges est telz:	The treatment is as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take care that the grinald moves from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	do the fire on each side in turn, then scorch it lightly, then take it with pincers and cut it off.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little bit of paper, then do not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	And if the break is large, then join it with a stitch, and heal as long as it is healthy;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, then do not use force, for with time and without force, it will heal itself and cause a scar.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the piercing goes from the outside of the ear towards the top, then turn the paper over and pierce it with tweezers, and cover and press from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is moved by the incision, then do not harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the piercing is covered, let it be oiled with salty water, and heal the place where it causes a scar as long as the patient remains healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinch is a grease that is caught in the webs of paper on top of it, and this happens more often to children than to adults, and grieves them much, and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hurry to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	And so when they lie down on their faces, and sleep on it, and their paper is wet above their chins which swells and changes color because of the Exinch that forms in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place between your two arms and feel the pain between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the way of this treatment is that the patient puts his head in salt water;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then he takes a linen cloth, and sets up a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of Exinch in each part, and then puts it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your hands from both sides so that the Exinch is assembled into the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	And cut into the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula, making a split that is not larger than the wound made to the vein.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin smooth all the way until you come out.
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And in many places it comes out of the split, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	So remove all the bandage between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is well spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and keep your hands from touching the split, so that you do not come into contact with all of the spatula up to the oil, so that you do not dirty it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the extraction does not come out in the tightness of the split, so that the split is slightly opened, just a little;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then, as we have said, then take out with care, then moisten the wrappings in water, and put them back on, and draw from the bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put on it to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the place of an abscess, then the healer pours water and soothes it as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When hair grows on paper that is not natural to it, and becomes wrinkled, if it damages the hairs, and causes certain diseases as usual tears and softening of the papers and scabs, so much that it is a cause of hair destruction;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and is the cure according to four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cautery, or by medicine astringent according to that which it is before, or by plaster of cautery, and is made or by incision and stitching or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the disease in your right hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	s'elle est convertie, c'est boin;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if it is converted, that's good; if not, pour an aiguille on all the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let this be the margin of the paper where the hairs grow out from these hairs, and lead the thread above all the paper, and turn it back to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then make in the dislocated part of the paper, dislocating the hairs, all the spine completely covering, from the big tear until the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then remove the thread, and place on the paper a little piece of cloth and drape, then sign on the paper a shape like a pear, as if it were a mirth, and moreover, the shape must be according to the quantity that you want to lift up the paper which is devised to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if it is necessary that much of the paper be lifted according to what you have determined, so that the paper softens;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	and then stretch out all the spine on the two lines that you have marked, and start with great pain until small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let it be one of the cleavages near the hair in the thickness of a root, then pour the vinegar into one of the two angles where cure, and then scorch it all;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the two lips to a stitch of a needle with very fine thread, and wash the blood, and make air the excess of the threads on the two loops at nothing sticky, if you see to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, if you are not cured, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then cure the wound without a stitch of drying and constricting things, for the paper is relieved at the sound of the wound and the gathering of it, but the stitch is dead (as the old say), and it is painful work;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	is that you sign the paper with a mold that is also like the fur of mirabene, as we have told, at three times you will reverse it according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then chop off who is raised to small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, take a needle with a thread, and sew the shape:
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and bottle another delicate thread, and the second strong, and the third small, and join together between your two threads evenly:
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then move your hand evenly, and then cover all the skin with which you have signed, as we have told, then join together the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and treat it until it is well;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that the pain is relieved by a poultice and similar soothing ointment;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never has it happened that the hair of the paper is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you use what we said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitch between the two is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of wounds is done according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you turn the paper and put it inside according to what I said, and then make two incisions by art, and two sutures very long as the paper is and as narrow as the thread that is used for the sponge.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie like two shoulders on each side where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then join them very gently over what rises from the paper by oil, and strain the two incisions of the two parts together;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it like this for a few days, and the wound that was drained will get better and heal on its own,
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is late, if the cup has one force, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	And when the wound is sewed up, and if the paper is lifted up, and they will no longer feel the hair;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	And this is the form of the two claws that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The ovraige is such that you press a very fine needle, and you pour a very fine and subtle silk thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	Then join the claws together very subtly, and make the length of the threads one palm's length of yarn;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	Then arrange the other thread of fine silk briefly, and tie the claws with a very subtle thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	Then place the patient's head in your seat;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	And let the sun be bright so that the ovraige is subtle and small, then pour the needle into all of the hair at the root, and make it go through the paper quickly as you draw it up from the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then pull out the hair up to the jaw, pour it into the jaw, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then pull your hand out so that the hair comes all the way out to the jaw in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the jaw is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then draw the jaw back with all the thread you have ordered, so that the jaw comes out from the hole above and you can see it with the eye.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then draw back the jaw and the thread, and when the oil comes out and leaves it for two or three days, let the hair grow in its place and the hair grows on top of it;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hair is short, then accompany a long natural hair with it, and lift it up or leave it, so that it is extended and then let it lie down.
de la porriture de l’oil	to prevent oil damage
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	Now this disease, which is called "bleeding," or where the poultice comes in contact with oil, there are two ways.
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and another unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And there is a doubt and fear about injury, or a cut, or a cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the way of treatment in this is that you tear away the skin, and separate the lips from it, and put linseed inside, and keep it until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you should not use for the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but treat with things that soften, as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the water of the spring or the ale be boiled, and the seed of flax be cooked, and the oil of dill be melted in none of the oils, and wrap it up, and treat with it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your remedy is that you put yourself on guard so that it does not harden according to the shape that it was before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and the remedies that we have said are only effective if we address this disease, so that it does not return according to the shape that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the horse that comes out of the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which is called "axacrati," is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounds and slashes and cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of this chapter is that you take a needle, in which it has double thread, and throw it into the flesh, and pierce it with the left hand so much to the right, that the thread comes out at II shoulders of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then put the hook above all the needle, and the cap above the wide spike.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what it should, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If he does not, take the razor and put it in the split, and turn the paper over, and make two splits where it sits inside the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the two splits of the two angles of the incision that you have made be joined together so that when they are put together, their shape is like the shape of a letter which has no «I griesche».
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then cut off that piece, according to the quantity that its sides are apart, from that which is inside the paper, then attach the two separated parts, and sew them together with a thread of linen;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then use the medicines that we have spoken of to soften it, and wrap it up, until it is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a split, or a stitch, or a cauterization, then it is necessary that you make a straight split in the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said above;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and it must be done the preparation according to the form of the disease, for it is many different in form, and the master surgeons order everything so that it may return to its natural form;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is required for preparation and instruments in various situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	doux soudain de la papier
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this weld is made in such a way that the paper above is welded with the white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you should burn the tip of a razor on the paper, and blow it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and spread them out as pinches, until you have what is suitable for the subtle spaulding, which should not be too sharp or too fine, so that the patient does not suffer from the too sharp spaulding which might blister the oil;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and so your incision, from which you peel off the gathered one, lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and it is healed all that has been gathered, and does not go into the sharp salt water, and the lifting of the soft water, and the chain;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wool wet in abundance of ointment;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days use the chain and the dry things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the finger is according to two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	she is nervous and seems to I dry medicine, and another that is not at all nervous, but seems to be white frozen moisture, which when you touch it with iron and heat it with pinches, so can't anyone;
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appearances begin to spread towards the great tears, and grow less and less until they cover the whole sight and light and motion of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the way of incision is that the patient puts his head in your lap, then he works on the hairs;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and give the paper to your hand, and twist the fingernail with small tweezers, and lift them up;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put a hair of horse, or cow, or bull, and thread it firmly;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the needle's point slightly and thread it through the nail, and pierce it completely through the nail, and tie the nail with a thread and lift it up, and peel off all the nail that remains on the toe of the nail where the pluck comes out and the silk on the hair until the head, then cut the remaining one in the root of the tears with an incision very thin and small, and leave the natural tears or tears usually come; so that by the incision does not go the course of the tears:
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and never stretch the finger at the knuckle alone, and on the wire, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then burn it all off with fire so that this is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And keep so that the spindle does not touch the raw wool and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision pour a little oil of sesame, and a ring made of limestone, and leaves it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then he cares for this as much as it is healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the finger is not nerveous, and you cannot put in the needle, and this shape of the joint with medicines is cured many times;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they are born as I have told you in the division, and if you see it covered, so work with oil of sickness, and take a light spindle according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the finger slowly, and if you see it slim down little by little and its root is pressing hard, then distil from your mouth in the oil collar made of litargyrum and dou collar red and brown, and stop the oil until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin again with this same work, as much as it is all boned.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If any thing is opposed to oil in the flesh, as an abscess is, then milk, and first treat the abscess while it is sound, then begin again the work as before until it is sound.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	If the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts in the oil, then suspend it for a moment, and dip some part of it, not all at once, so that tears do not come;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distil in the red oil collar which is made of litargyrum.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from the flesh that grows on the apricot
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men have never had a red hair, and they peel the prunelle and bind it to papers and turn it towards the sun, and seem like a rose of basil.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the head-injury if the patient places his head in your lap, then he turns the eyes, and twists all this in the shape of a hook with appropriatehooks, and supports it with force;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first layer, and keep cutting all the way to the end, and be careful not to blight the oil at the head-injury;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and be the incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incising of the nail and with small efforts so that one oste the sebene, if like the form after this chapter shows it;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is complete and all the bone is cut, then employ the oil of seil or you distill colier red and similar medicines corrosive, and put on the oil a cotton with admixture of ointment, so that it is assured of an abscess heated;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if I do not delay, and the sun rises, and you doubt an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with things that calm an abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and in this way make a paste that is mixed with oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But first you should know that you should adjust the cure of each weak oil according to the natural path;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and from the accidental way, in iron work;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that the members are suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red that are covered on the oil, and endure his work and weaken the oil all the time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	So the first thing you should know is that if you see that the oil is good, healthy, and strong, and there is no other disease than health;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then mix it with some water in this way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Tell the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins completely according to his wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle twice as much according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And are two oils by degrees in one degree according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	Then bind those veins with care, and wash the blood every hour another one, until you see remove those veins away from the oil;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and keep that you do not blur the oil at the tips of the needles, and make this work before noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you don't overheat those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, if distill in the oil green and red essence to corrupt what is delayed of the stink;
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the power to bind all of that in this hour, then make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the hairs, and leave it for several days until the pain is relieved and assured of an abscess being hot, then begin again according to this method which is before until he is healthy;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of healing:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the pipe
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The wound is called a fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with fire cautery and medicinal herbs as I have described above, and it is not healed, then cut open the abscess at the root, where it must die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then this is the form:
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called an "aspire chief", and be done from head to foot, and be poked as with a nail as it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place it on the corroded part of the bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little until you feel that corruption has been removed:
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do not make this again, then return to the place of medicine drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the leather is tight, and it has not been washed for a while, and the core of the bow is also tight, and remains so for 40 days, and there is no sign of an abscess, and other bad things do not happen, then he is healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, if there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula to the perforation of the nose according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with medicines that dry, and when it is uncovered take care that the iron is at three angles, and the furrow is smooth until the top, as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then put it on the bone with the limb, and keep your hand away from the oil I pick, then turn all the iron until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain according to what he experiences when holding his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and when you restore the place of dry medicine, as I have taught you, and when the horse becomes hot and toughens the limbs, then bring the matter to the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	is less burdensome for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When all limbs are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance to the nose, nor reduction, if it comes that you lay the patient down;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the healer, then put leechers there to suck without hurting to extract, then put on oil, made from acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocollus, and then strain the oil, and apply it with bandages and sheets;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the manner of the sheets that you take enough soft sheets, and double each one in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the limbs need;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	and then extract from above a hard bandage, and start again the suction to avoid hurting;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suction cups and leave the oil extracted day and night, and it softens over time, so you must remove it all;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the oil heal, it is good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then start again with the plaster and linen, and the bandage and suction cups until it is well.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the breaking of a thread from a woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When the dislocation comes in the wrapped cloth, then open it, and comes out like grains of resin, and is likely to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the wrappings are such that you stick a needle into the root of the part below until it comes out at the top, and then stick another needle where there is thread from the arm;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cover the head of the thread with a double thread and tie a part of the vein, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put another oil in abundance of vinegar;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread rubs against the vein, then heal the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the wound is never restricted by the vein in any part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the hairs are of great appearance, if he pierces it with a fine spud that comes perfectly from the oil, and drives away the moisture of the albuginea and cuts the hairs, and enters again so soon;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "Alcunnati" does not exist except in oil, resembling water descending, and it is not water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of this appearance of the opening is that you make sit the patient on one seat dressed and straight, then take the head between your two hands, and move it while you see the bow come up to your hair.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let him lie down, and do not get up or be upset, and look at the patient's things so as he wanted.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not get up, know that it is acute, and the moving of the bow should not be dressed as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatulum and set it on the corneal membrane I spot by the continuance of the connection with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bow comes out.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is out, if it is mixed with hot liquid honey, or sharp water or fenugreek is boiled and honey, then be cured by another cure as long as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have sharp tools in our division, and what is needed to pierce.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	If we work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you put the patient in a cross-legged position between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and press firmly on him with oil.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	Then put the oil paper in your left hand if the hairs are on the left, or in your right hand if the hairs are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	Then take in your right hand, if the hairs are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the hairs are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	Then place the point of the instrument at the center of the hair by its thickness with a rakes of oil on the part of the smaller wound, then press the instrument called "almagda" firmly, and turn your hand back until it pierces in the oil's blubber, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and the measure of the vein of the eye must be at the perfect end of the space that is from the apricot up to the end of blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	is the crown of oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the transparent horn, and put the instrument up to the eye where the water is, then express it out one way at a time.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is now sitting down, then see the patient in front of him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	Then rest for a little while, and the water comes up again, put pressure on it with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place, gently extract the eye turning your hand this way and that;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put a little drop of gem water in it, and remove this oil from inside it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place by the side the oil of spikenard or another moist oil in a cup and in plenty of wine, and mix with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our group, let us put on quickly with plenty of wine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If the almagre cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which comes this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And so pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a small hole then drop in the water, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and when the work is finished, prepare for the patient a dark place to sleep, where he sleeps on his back.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be free from all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his condition for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then remove it in the same dark house and test his sight, and let him see a few things, and then he is tied again until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and do not do this while the patient is still suffering from the incision, but it is necessary to keep him quiet, so that the blood does not flow.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	For the abscesses, when they are ready, you must remove the dressing before the seventh day and clean them up.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when he is calmed down, so that the sight turns inward and sets on his cheek, let it hang down all day, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	Then take him out of the house little by little, and turn him around.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no one should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us from the Land of Jerusalem who told us that in their country they still made almagre by grinding, for which they sucked the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our country, nor have I ever heard of it in books of the ancient ones.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps this is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the appearances of the shapes of almagre, so that he who does not know them may see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let there be pure copper:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this middle substance be, and behind it in three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	from the chest to the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	No time are born or are diverse eggs eggs laid, of which there are some who seem scorpions at mouth pies;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such eggs or if there is an egg with green color and if there is an egg with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case of these eggs that is green, and not encrusted, it is convenient that you seat the patient between your hands towards the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and apply the egg to those eggs, and dry them firmly;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Then take this that you can hold in your hand of a fine blade made of iron from one side, as long as you see that this egg is all bone;
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains nothing of it that cannot be covered, if you open it with all the delicate instruments lightly, so that nothing stays;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if he does not soar up, or an abscess, so much sear as it is necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize as soon as the sweat is dried up and all the pus is drained, then apply oil or vinegar to the wound immediately and thoroughly.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If it has been operated on, and moisture enters as far as the palate, know that he is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not penetrate so much as it should, know that there is no bone above it, and the instrument will not cut properly:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you must insert a piece of linen thread that is neither too thick nor too thin, and wind it around each knot with enough space or less between them as needed;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's head on the thread so that it supports his weight, and draw it by the nose while smelling so that it comes through his nose into his mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times teach the child to use the pot, and this is a light thing for him who must do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	and then take the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and tie them together in turn while we are spinning like this.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Make it so that you can hear that the new one has been corrupted, then treat the thread, wash the blood, and wet the thread in Egyptian salt, and then put it back on the nose as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Make it so that you can hear that the oil has been corrupted for three or more days, as long as the thread is delayed from the car;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on the nose a string of linen for some days as long as it is healthy, and if there is a need to use dried medicines, do so.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, whereon one distills oils and medicines or severs.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, as a chain, and conduct it also;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, then make a closed chain, and be the instrument plain for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and I always hold the head when one heats oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the chest to the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a pain arises in the head from a disease called "thunder", and increases and becomes great enough that it is visible with the eye;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this you must kop it at the beginning, and the bone all over, then put fire on the cautery or medicine;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay koping it until it is great, then take care if it is hard, of its color, of its poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	If one does not touch iron, for it is an abscess that is inflamed, because when it is touched there comes great evil to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	And if the abscess is caused by a soft touch, not by a sharp object, and you see that it can be covered completely, then empty the patient and cover it without fear, and heal the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewed up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Saiches that when solu[t]ions of continuance comes into one of these ovraiged cartilage, i profit poc, fur that in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary that there be no doubt if the wound is fresh throughout;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then join the two lips with a stitch, and then heal it as long as it is healthy;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are twisted on one side or the other, then it is necessary that you peel all the parts of their skin as long as they heal, and then join the two lips with a stitch, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood and burnt incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the powders a piece of plaster from strong or other plaster that bonds, and leaves it until it falls by itself, then heal with ointment as long as he is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The method for suturing is that you assemble the solution thus:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the method for suturing the abdomen;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	With hands at home inside the lips of an abscess seem like grains of sand, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn the lips, and cut each notch, and take it with pincers and cut it into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and then apply the vitriol paste after the incision, until the scar is stained;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest, and heal the wound with dry things as long as he is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the cheeks
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times, he comes down on the gums with a sharp edge, which the old people call "albula".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	If it is convenient that you hold it with tweezers and cut it at its root, and let the bow or blood run;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	Then put thereon the vitriol powder, or other restraining and drying powders;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it returns after the incision, and often happens, so that when you cut it again, and cauterize it;
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments for copping.
des sordens	of the ordains
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	No times are assembled at the top of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, sharp and rough things;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and no times are the teeth black and yellow and rotten, as long as the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	If it is necessary that you hold the sick person between your hands, and his shoulders are in your presence, and you lift up the lower parts or the buttocks that protrude, as long as there is nothing to delay it;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and do so with black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are all mixed together;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one does not take the first cut, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then begin again on the second day and the third, until you have all lifted up;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth have to do with different kinds of tools for grinding, according to what the doctor demonstrates, because the rasier used to remove the hair from between the teeth is of a different shape than that which grinds the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these shapes and others are fitted with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you cure a tooth of its pain that you draw it out as soon as possible, for this must not be done at all.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	for it is a high-quality substance, so there is no excuse to delay drawing it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So then when the patient is in pain, you must be certain of the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Often the pain of the patient disappears, and he believes that it is in a good tooth, and he makes the tooth that hurts him be pulled out;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and yet the pain does not go away for this, until the evil is extracted, because we have already done it to these patients;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are sure of the tooth that hurts, then it is necessary that you scratch the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gums on all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then you put it in your hand or in small pliers very carefully at the first hole and hole, until it is well extracted, then he grasps the pliers firmly;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the head of the sick person between your knees, and hold it still very well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out on its own, take one of these instruments and gently place it inside each part, and move it as you did before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if his nose is pierced and bleeds, then you should fill it with gauze, where the piercing is;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if he is held with subtle tongs so that he does not break when he is extracted;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to cover the wound on the gums in order to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you must take care not to break it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the wickedness of the root, causing greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And be careful that you do not do it like the ignorant surgeon who, because of his haste and recklessness, often breaks the carriage, and does not administer what we have told you;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring it once by the root of that great disease so that it does not hold on to anything, or by the carriage that it breaks, as we have often wanted;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the heat is removed, wash its place with wine or sesame oil and linen.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and when it heals over, so that often happens, if you employ the place of vitriol crushed;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if it does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments, so that the teeth first move slowly, are long and thick, so that they do not double up when you draw the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of thick members so that they do not bend when you pull it, and let them be of good forged iron, and let them have teeth for holding it in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in place at the extraction, if you put cotton wet with oil or butter on the place for one or two days until the roots are soft, since the claws that are called "algefri" seem like a fingernail;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and inside make it as with a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you should strip the flesh completely around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'althali', that is to say file, which is this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be big or small so that it does not break, and its root springs up from this, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, if you aid yourself with all the instruments, whereby the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has two heads, from which this form comes:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the rationale of the dens, and from this instrument which seems like a pair of large pliers, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	and let the instrument be big so that it cannot break, and know that many of the thick instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the master sagacious tries his instrument himself according to what his work and the disease demonstrate to him, because there are many diseases for which the old do not teach instruments, but if it does not break the carriage or other bones on which it rolls, or on which he is laying, if he seeks the instruments that are appropriate to it, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, whereby this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and strong holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but it can hold and cut off.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place of the medicines that fit this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, if the doctor has all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not straight according to the natural shape of the body, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the root is not beyond the tooth, and is not in its right place, and can not be sewn or filed.
adonques lou raie;	then the extract:
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is aerated with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is similar to a small needle, and made of iron as it were:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits tight and tight to the tooth's durezza, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then take a file of this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file where we make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and by little and little he pulls his teeth out, so that it does not move until it makes a sound.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and then smooth it all down with a rasp, and its hardness is too great and it blisters the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the razor until it is even, so that it does not blister the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth moves
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the teeth are loose in front, whether by pounding or by biting, and the patient cannot press on what he is chewing so that he does not make noise, and you have cured them of constricting medicines, and that does not help;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if it is necessary to restrain it with a gold wire, for the silver wire becomes green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you want to put in place the teeth, take the wire and double bottle between the two teeth healthy, then put the heads between the teeth of meat, if there is one or more, until you have cleanly up until the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	and then start again with the covering up until the part where you are starting, and hold your hand gently and cleanly as long as it doesn't move;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your hand be at the root of the tooth so that he can't escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then take the heads with pliers, and assemble them together, and put them between the healthy tooth, and so that he doesn'blece the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if he falls, or the wire breaks, hold it with another wire;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	If it was to take long, it will last all its time, and this is the shape of the bones and the appearance of the joints of the two upper limbs, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place little by little, as we have said:
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And if one is not skilled and patient, and does not do it little by little, and a tooth is put back into the socket, as we have said, and delayed and served thus for a long time;
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the ring of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	And never is it good that comes out of the tongue or nature, which one is born with:
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by an accident of a seared wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and hold his head in your hand, and raise his tongue:
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	and then sever the nerves of the limb as far as the tongue is detached from its bed, and if there is any pain or not, and this is due to sudden injury from a wound, so that he severs the ligature and cuts the nerves;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the cut does not go too deep, lest the artery be severed;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done so, raise the level of the water and thus dry it with linen;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient have each night, so that the ligature does not close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if the blood comes out again, put vinegar on the wound;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if it does not stop, then cauterize with the slow fire, which is good for this;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat with other treatments until he is well,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a dark or hard-colored sore that the patient does not feel, do not touch it, for this is a cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining towards the blench, and there is moisture, if he gets the oncine, and he rubs with a thin spatula, and frees it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if he comes to your aid, put vinegar on it until it is blistered, and then return to your aid as you draw everything out firmly;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift his arm up and down and stretch it, and cure him with other cures until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Once inside the throat are the "goda" which are called mandibles, and they are properly called; when you cure them, as we said in the section on dislocation, and if they are not cured, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If the abscess is small and its color is pale, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and its root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the pain of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it has stopped bleeding, and then you will remove it, or it would tear itself apart;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of pale color and its root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first look to see if the abscess is hot and inflamed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in the sun and let his shoulders be warm, and let him open the mouth and place the finger between his hands, and press the tongue towards the instrument, so that it is shaped like this:
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and be of silver or of fine gold as well as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	And then press the tongue on all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if take the onion and put it in amber, and try harder than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and don't try any threads with it, then wrap the instrument, so this is the form, that seems a strong one;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all the time the head are curved, and one side to another, and they are very sharp, and is made of iron where or of anvil:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you take off the cover with pliers, here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And be trenchant on one side, and no name on other side;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have copied one of the ambers, if copy the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and very easily, and let it stand until it is well, if gargarize the patient with cooked pomegranate juice, or dried leaves of mirth, and similar things, as much as the sun is set;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat until he is well;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and never emerge in the throat other abscesses than the two mandibles, if they are removed as thoroughly as the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was within her throat, namely a small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had very tightly closed all the throat so that the woman could neither breathe nor drink nor eat and would have died if she had stayed like this for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so raised that it had risen two inches on either side of the opening where it was growing.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	So I hurried, and stuck in one of the oesophagi, then pulled it firmly, and pushed a large portion of bowels out;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	and then refitted it again on the other side of the opening of the nose, and shut his mouth and pressed his tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	Afterwards I stuck in the oesophagus into these abscesses, and filled a part of it, and let out only a little bit of blood;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and then cut off the woman's throat, and now began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting that abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess then closed again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very thick;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I set it in place and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	so that it stopped growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and then I left those parts, and only God knew what would happen to me next.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the wound heals up and the woman runs away and is far away, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	And if she becomes pregnant and grows fat, she is called "wound".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When she has healed, as we have said in the dislocation, and her healing does not benefit, and you see that the lower abscess is calm and pale, then it is time to cut her.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is roundly assembled and is not far off;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or frothy red or black, so that you avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the eye disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blenching and its length, that you cause the patient to sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned above;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then you place the onyx in its uvula, and draw it back, and cover it with the two instruments which I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the surplus which is beyond the natural term;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cover more, it will be painful to the voice and to speaking;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use of that which we have said in the incision of the two mandibles, and heal it until it is well.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has doubt about covering, then you must use fire cautery on the sensitive part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of fire cautery is sharp and bitter.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the sick person puts his head in your lap, and then he presses the tongue to the instrument which we have said or fire cautery, and confuses with sharp quick water, so that it is not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and in using the movement of this instrument, from which comes this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And put the head in a cap or hood where the medicine is placed, as if it were the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on top of the head;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down his throat and hurt him;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then take your hand to all the medicine and press it on top of the head, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it clear and the medication is gone;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument on all of the cotton on the string above, until the cotton dries on the fabric.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterization is perfect, then let it dry, and clean after three or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to re-apply the medicine cauterization, if necessary, and after the cauterization wash out the cotton wrapped around it with water from a vessel, of cotton wetted in the medicine, and clean what is inside of the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be dipped in cold water, and be cured with gargles until it is well.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than the incision, only the cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is cured with fumigation in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and aron and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them into a pot, and pour it in easily, and let it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and may be well glued with strong soil, and enmi the pot has I instrument chisled according to this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And is of silver or gold, and is one of the heads bottle in the mouth of the patient as long as the steam rises through the cannula until the urine is deprived;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the beginning often, as long as the urine is dry, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the opening of the abscess, because many things have come;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and not to make what ever that to the decline of the abscess is hot.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a cannula and put inside the head of a hook made of wax, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the hook of wax does not let the steam be heavier in the mouth, and this is a good cure together save.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times there is an obstruction in the throat of bone or spine of fish, or nothing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	So if you can see it, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and if what does not open and is put back in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	in case the thing opens up by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or if the patient swallows a sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread crust;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and he lets it hang on a string, and then swallows it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the right place, if it opens, and then draw hard;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come from what we have said, then take this instrument of throwing according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And the instrument is curved at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily and raise the jaw;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it come out, nor poke the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and make sure the patient does not cough up the instrument, so that it does not get stuck or stuck;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if he swallows the instrument whole, or pulls it out smoothly all at once, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	And make the instrument curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily, and raise the chief [larynx] higher; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, or else the sound will be blocked, nor should you prod the bone within; and make sure that the patient swallows the instrument, for in doing so he will feel relief or pain; if the fluid is swallowed, or if it is drawn out of the instrument evenly, then let it go.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No medicine will heal him without bloodletting, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicine;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when that does not help, then look in the mouth of the sick person with the sun, so that you press the tongue to the instrument which I have told you;
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, if it runs with a small hook, or with tiny claws that go under him.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if he doesn't respond, take a dog's chain, and pour it into the throat of the patient, then pour or pour from the chain's iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient's blood is very hot every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	and then take a full glass of cold water, and open the mouth, and fill it with water, and move his hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and if soon the blood feels the water, let him spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not feel cold as we have said, then fumigate the patient with ash, using the instrument I have spoken of in the smoking treatment.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, because it will soon taste bitter.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	and the method of smoking if it is so that you press the mud or there are coal ashes in a place, and in that same pit there is a hole for the instrument to enter;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then pour the smoke treatment, and let the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but goes straight to the blood;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the blood will now stop, and if it does not stop, then begin the fumigation again and again;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and suffer the patient to have thirst, and drink no water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then the remedy will be good for him that he should pass through this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument how it passes the blood, if it is so, when one can see it, seems like hooks bent to force them to enter the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and has the appearance of a careening beak, and it is sharp like limestone, so that whoever takes it cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Mouths of appearances of an abscess are, according to what the memory comes here before one and another in this book, and are diverse in perforation and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, of which one is in its own image, and from that which causes moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	The second way is for the joints where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess at the top is different from that at the root, and the abscess at the shoulder joint is different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if to abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the bowels are still according to their fulfillment;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if to such that one must pierce when they are curbed, and do not die according to their fulfillment, as is the case with abscesses that are deliquescent joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come out of the joints, and are left until they rot within, for fear that if the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, then this is a cause of contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or the abscess is from the principal member, and if you delay the perforation as long as it is still alive, it will harm the principal member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or the foundation is deliquescent, if one pierces it so that it is still alive;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not convenient that you pierce an abscess without digestion having been accomplished, so that the foundation, which is deliquescent, does not become completely corrupted, and be dilated within, and a fistula come about;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and can't heal it for a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	and you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to the fulfilment, and that is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the 감소 of pain and redness, and the movement and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must make the perforation sit more comfortably in the place of the abscess, and where it opens;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the perforation is long in the body, and the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and sides and all over the body, and there is no pain.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to which limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in a raised state, if you allow the piercing to remain until it is completely cured, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, if your body was full of blood from it, and wet with pus;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and because of this they harden the lips and him parboil.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if any abscess that are pierced according to the breadth of the body, according to which the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And you must bring a little abscess, a little pit;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in great abscesses, great pits, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if at such abscesses it is necessary to pierce the skin, and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when they have become hard like leather, and are softened, if one does the same as one does to blisters:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if at such ones that are split into three angles, and at such ones that one covers like the skin of the mirtal tree, like abscesses in the angles;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if at such ones one makes a round incision, and other incisions and looks like it has been covered;
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce it clearly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has grown great boils, and you pierce it, if you do not extract all the boils at that time, but extract some of them.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess just until the next day, then do not extract much of anything;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	make this several times from little to little, until all the boils are gone;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	The patient is of weak virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old, aged people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the skin, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has a great bulge, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all of the bulge at once, but only part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing more; do this many times from one heavy to the next, until the bulge is completely gone; however, it is a weak person, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old men decrepit.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Then use this remedy with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound heals, and watch to see if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a simple wound, then apply linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many boils, then you must tie each one with a bandage so that they come together;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have copped in the aposteme a part of leather, and you have sewed it inside, it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or woolen rags dry from moisture, and tie it just until three days;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the bone, and the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the pain comes to your head, then bring cold water and quickly, and wet the sheet, and put it on the place where it is hurting many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the pain of blood persists, instruct him in government and cure, and the powders that I have said to put on them in this book, and if he has fever or is wet, then you must put sheets and blankets soaked in wine and oil warm;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if he is scorched, and his limbs are swollen, it is necessary that you cover him with sheets soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until three days, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then clean out the abscess and drain it and heal it, as is right, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this is what one should know universally in treating abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	For I have told you how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and now listen to me about the paste.
des soros	abces
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or treat the head of the shoulder so that small abscesses are created, and they are treated in such a way that they are like webs, as with the knee of a gown, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There is grease and oil where there is moisture as well as feathers;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if it is hard and bone-like, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose itself.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you experience all the instrument called "intramessore", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if it flows from above the long way.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture has dried up, if you leave the hair that contains the moisture in place, it will stick again once it has dried up;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	and then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if there is any present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if there is none, in water and milk, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and this man who is delayed by night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And thus start the cotton again, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know well that it does not stay away from night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound with ointment to suit, as long as he is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, so that the scar remains long;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and I put your scabs, and scorch all over, and put all your cure to draw the skin where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery does not go against you, do as I have said before.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And so you make the abscess if it is painful, and the barber's and doctor's tools as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the painful abscess and the wet one, for it is lighter in blood loss.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in any of these abscesses or head where there is no moisture, and those that I have described, where the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess as a heavy stone, hard and pale, and could not break it;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if there is none, one would also have made a good wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come out at the top, it is necessary that these who come out at the tips of the ears be completely removed so that the bowel can be pushed out.
et les cure si com il covient.	and heal them as is due.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times have there been abscesses in the throat, and they drain, and cause pain, and do not go to any other place or heal, and are rotten, and one is infected with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scar is properly within its rib, like the root and the abscess at the top, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the appearances of these scars are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is the same color as the bone, and does not move from any part, nor is it deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	it is necessary that you cut it from above, and scrub each part, and the two lips of the face with one hand, if you need them, as we have said in the top abscesses.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut it too deep, so that the hand does not escape, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	If you cover the vein or artery and it does not let you work, then put vinegar on the wound, or some powders that stop the blood, and draw the wound out.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and then begin to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood has stopped, if you return to your work, as long as you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then feel with your finger if there are any small bumps, if they are, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	If there is great pain in the root of the abscess, it only comes when you cut the abscess in its root, but leave a strong double thread and let it hang, without causing any harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then employ the wound of fine cottoncloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you catch the whole plague, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and sewed them up, so that there is no delay from the abundance of the plague.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you hear to cover the root of it, and draw it out with force, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofula that have excess, pierce where it opens, so that it dies;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce in the same way as said before, depending on it, then I apply ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts him who is delayed from corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well washed, then heal with ointment causing confusion, until he is healed.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The old said and spoke about the scalpel of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I never saw in our land that it was done, and this is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the split of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and let him not do it himself, for all the veins and the poison of the disease are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in II adenoids.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the throat channel, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we do so with three circles or four small splits through, between the two circles or by the quantity of the split on the soft part, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no chisel, and the vessel is long from one.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to its entire length, and then splits the meat as much as it comes to the wood;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then split the soft part, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the splitting of the fluid of the throat that jumps out through the place that has been broken, and by the loss of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed when we are in doubt about strangle, gather the two lips of the wound on both sides, and the entire cut goes under the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer drugs that cause nausea, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: 'Do not make this cut until the throat is completely closed up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the fault leaves it.'
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cover the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and so the elder is commanded to leave the wound open for as long as the disease is gone, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he orders to sew up the wound and heal, until it has healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a damsel took a knife, and put it in her throat, and went out into the cold.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found it as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and I saw well that it had not been cut open by a vein or an artery but was coming out through the throat, and the veins were going out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was well;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there remained with the damsel only that she was red in the face, and returned to her usual state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for on this day I would that in the cutting of the epiglottis there be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	The abscesses are called "glandular glands", and are large in size, of a yellow color, and very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two manners:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	where natural has no cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one is according to two manners: one seems like fat to us, and another manner seems like an abscess that comes from our blood.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and he has fear, and does not fit to act on fire furiously than in the little one who is small, and test and search all the inter-machine:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you try it too as I know, and can't do anything, if the cap, if he covers us, and treats all his coat, if there is any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well soon, and treat it as it should be, so that it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I say all the difference that exists between us and the outcome.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that the outcome is painful and feverish, as long as the bulging is passed, and the blistering is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and the heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With good health there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a fluid that is similar to the blood of the body according to its color, and it begins like a seed and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two appearances, either fat or moist, and many colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of our nature, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to what their shape may be or the paste that follows it.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way to extract abscesses from the body is that you squeeze or moister place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel the instrument has reached the bottom, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then take out the instrument, and take care not to miss anything.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moisture runs quickly, that it be of the same color as I said for the other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument comes out moist, know that it is fat, so that you hold it with a pin and lightly peel it from each side and pay attention to where it lies, so that you take it out healthy with the good health.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out piece by piece so that nothing stays behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything stays behind, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if there is a little delay, and it does not trouble him, then employ some corrosive water powders to extract the wound, and put something soothing on the pustule, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it hurts us much, then count the two lips of the wound, and treat what causes the pain.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein is under a stone or another obstacle, then hurry and employ the power of vitriol, and let it rest for two or three days, until the wound is pus-filled, and pour on the blood.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to treat what has been delayed from the outside.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	Behold the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of three manners:
grans et moien et petit;	large and long and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they are of three manners:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, in order to close the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles used to pierce sorcerers, and they are made of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are bright yellow, and are more proven by black lead to close the abscesses of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three manners:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the size of the aperture.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the hooks are of many appearances, as you will see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	Great, medium, and small ones.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if they have two curbs of three kinds as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if they have three curbs and are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if they have two curbs, and one with only one curb, and are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these should be sharp, and some of them do not cut well but only from one side, so that we skin the nerves in order to hit the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And these introverters are put back in many places so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and not use one more than in a good place, if legs, arms, breasts, and hands, and similar things;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make another instrument small, resembling a scythe of beasts, according to this form, so that it does not hurt the flesh:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it on no more than once to the place that heals with a comb of veins, and arteries, and never according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and never do men's breasts swell when they become corrupted, as much as they seem to be a woman's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and do not remain ugly and swollen, and who want to cure them, if it is appropriate according to this form of this line . b . until g .:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scalth the fat, and apply medicine to the wound washing it with water, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and cure it as long as it is healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast has run down, and is soft because of its size as it would be in a woman, then make two holes on top, by two similar splits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of so that one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then scald the skin that is between the two lips, and bone the fat, and add what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the cure, until he is well;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not well, or the incision is not yet entirely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the escape of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it has dried up the remaining skin and fat, then treat it until it is well.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	which come from sore buttocks are managed like hard scrofula or if it has ribs, and if there is only one that contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	So those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line. b. up to line. g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are empty, then plug the wound with wet cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the cutting of scrofula, and if the wound opens bowels, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin that is above it is sewn together, then many abscesses come, and also come to the escaped vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if they prick at their base, so that it is for the artery, if the abscesses are long all around.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel extraction.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, if it is necessary to move apart gradually.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and this chapter teaches that it is foolish to cut the abscess, and least of all when it is connected to the jugular vein or to the neck and mouth of others, and it is very dangerous.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the cure of iron, and that which is at the head also must be avoided, and in that which is inflamed with an artery, it is done from above the skin with a long knife.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the size like a single piece of cloth, and separate the artery from the membranes very carefully until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	Then bottle up the blood, and let it pierce almost to the other coast, and hold back the artery with a double thread of thread in two lines according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	Then mark the line that is between the two knots of an introducer as far as the sun rises and sets, and let it come out, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	Then set in motion the cure that is due to water, until the line is broken.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat with an ointment that comes from this, until he is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	And if the abscess is near the vein, you should hold it in your hand what you can of the abscess and then bottle up the needle with moisture and let it pierce, and there are two threads, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	and tie the aposteme, if I told you, or the string of one of the two parts to the shoulder blades;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the string is not strong enough, if he returns another needle to all the thread from the first incision, and pulls out the strings in four lengths;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the aposteme until the surplus comes out, then cut the excess at the knot and leave what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on it a wet cloth in wine and oil, then bring him cures of camphor and cloves until he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	So too do arteries and veins; they come from the nerves when they are hurt, or because of excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And if there are more joints, and two at a time, and in all of them or some of them, where there is a knot, it seems the same color as the blood, and it has many symptoms without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they are restrained, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely cured, but let it continue;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and be quiet on all sides, and do not move forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in joints does not come to cover with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	for fear that they might contract;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or in front, make the skin with a scalp-pin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if it has a nail, and cut it at the root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the suspender has an oncine, and scratch it, then break the bone and patch the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of the large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Now there comes a pain in the belly and not elsewhere, it is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance, and its root is subtle and its head is big;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and I have both small and large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a house that had two or three belly buttons that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them; they were white, and had little roots, and they were hollow, and ran together with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I measured them and found one to weigh 18 ounces, and the other 6 zozimes; in the incision of the wound I saw that the patient is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist with a fine root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if you put it on a large spatule, and in your presence is the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when the cutter comes too often great removals of blood, and he goes out from you, so hurry up then cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient sweating and fearful of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made cloth, and bind the arterioles as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then the restraint, and do not cease to extract the hair of the face until it copes with the arête, and chiece by him sense work;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are thick, so that it hurts to cut them, but you can cut the half well, then cauterize it so that it does not come back;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then heal the wound, and keep you do not cut the thistle which is of faix color and poor sense and milk regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess infected, and I will come to the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the heat
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the wound comes by cauterization of a sore or cut of medicine, and is on the belly and some of the bouez, so as it happened in other wounds, or of blood that cuts off a vein or an artery according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the cut of medicine and by the exit of the bouez, if the color of the abscess seems to the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and opening of various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it to both sides it turns back, and then comes back again; and perhaps it becomes tighter, and widens greatly at the entrance of the bath and by strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it to your hand, do not constrain.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is due to blood, if it opens with these signs, the abscesses are big and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, if it seems hot at the touch, and the opening is so that you see its appearance is due to blood from the artery, or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For in the work of this chapter, there is doubt and fear; if, as I said to you, the chapitre of the abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or bad bowels, it is necessary that you instruct the patient that he cover himself, and be stretched out straight, then sign with your hand all around the navel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then you command him to walk softly between your hands, then enter the place that you have signed all around the navel, then stretch out half of the aposteme towards the top at all the great angle;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	and tie his neck with a strong rope or silk, firmly binding him.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then, extending halfway across the ligature, place your index finger and gently lift up the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it tied to the ligature, loosen it, and push the intestine back towards the abdomen's edge.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take care not to touch the crust, and cut off any excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery is blocked or bleeding, take care not to cry out too loudly, then return to your work and take two needles, thread them with two strong threads, and push the needles through where you have made a cut that you have pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the intestine in four places above the needles, and if you see any blood, remove the needles, and leave it there to dry up, and let it wither away on its own.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	you the salve when it is subtle and permeable, then heal him of what he needs, and cut off the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the place of what he needs, and bind the place;
dou chancre	 Dou Chancre.
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division the appearances of chancre, and how it must be operated on by medicines, and how it must be cured with iron;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let the old man say that when chancres are in a place where they can be raked out as chancres that are in mamelles, and in the cunt, and in similar places, and it must all be cut off when it is in an incipient state;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, then you must not approach it, for I have never found anything better;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	There was never a man who kept me from reaching my goal.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in place or can be removed, as we have said, is that you do not purge the black bile at any time;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him well if he has manifest fullness, then afire the bad blood so as to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then pour your oils or gangrene, and shave all his hair, leaving nothing;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press firmly on the place with your hand or any object, and the removal of blood from the artery or vein makes the cauterization necessary so that the wound does not heal;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments as long as he is healthy.
de ydropisie	About dropsy.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the appearances of droppy, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is cured with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	If it is just a little bit out of place.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch with iron in these two appearances:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	this is to know, tympanitis and hyposarcoma, because it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	So when you treat this appearance of edema (yropisie), which is called "eclites", and the cure does not benefit, if the patient is weak or has another disease besides edema, such as a stomach upset and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one does not touch with iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease but edema alone, and he is not too old or too young, then one must do this:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lift up the patient directly on your hands, and the assistants press the abdomen at the lower part of the back, then take the spine with thorns according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be trenching from both parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	be short, and let there not be so much space between it and the other flesh that it might come into the intestine when you put it in, and not get bruised.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look to see if there is water coming out towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it comes out straight down from the armpit, you should cut through it two hands wide on both sides;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if there is water coming out due to liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the armpit, two hands wide;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to pus, then on the right side, and it is not good that the patient lie on the cut so that the excess does not run into his weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and squeeze it out, and hold your hand to all the hair between the skin and the fat as you would do when stretching it out to the quantity of an inch or in wrapping it around;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	and pierce the lump until the pus comes out, and this is the place of the vein, then make it wide, and pour this instrument where this shape is:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles an slender silver dog, and is of brass or lightweight iron, and has in the end a small hole:
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it comes out on one side, there is a hole;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two more on the other, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is shaped like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers cut the pen with:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of the head there is an opening, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it comes out through this hole on the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty it halfway or one-third, because if you empty it more than that at this time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his spirit due to the weapon, or he will flail about, or come close to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease mean, and his hairs;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	Then train the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the key that stops the hole that is above the surgical wound, of which I have spoken, so you pierce according to this way;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering, and train a small amount of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do not do it any day, and keep yourself from following up too soon while there is still a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	and if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a little water, if the cure of the burial bed or the clay is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it turns brown from drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born with an imperforate penis, or if it has one that is small, or if it is not in its correct position.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it happens that he does not pierce the most subtle skin according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then if the patient has a small stone in the bladder, tie it and keep it there for three or four days until he urinate, then remove it when he urinates, and then reset;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and if by chance we do not understand at all, because the urine that comes out is not enough to leave the stone closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The piercing of which is painful, if it is medicine of the cloven tongue, if as we said, it expands itself.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the stone in its normal position are blue, because no one is born with a stone at the tip of the penis, so that he cannot urinate until he raises his penis towards the sky;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot have children because the matter cannot reach the womb, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of cauterization is that the patient lies down on his back; then put the head of the penis and the scrotum as with the size of a feather, so that the piercing stings in the middle, as it should;
des pustules de la verge	of the penis sores
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	And many times come cistern albaith in the penis, and is an appearance of a ugly horse;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malicious and non-malicious ones;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if you pinch them with subtle forceps and cut and clean them all, then put cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment on them;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure the ointment with diafinicon as long as it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the penis is malignant, of a putrid color and stinking, then you should apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and the blade is at the root of the hair, and part of it inside the skin and part outside, then you must first remove the blade that is inside.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is closed, if the wound runs.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you close it together, if it is not firmly sealed at the root of the hair, then it will turn black and corrupt the hair and where it grows.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If all that is black and corrupted is removed, then put on the plaster of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and seeds, and then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when blood comes out, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cauterizations assist in two configurations together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	this means, that is to say, at the evacuation of blood, and at the corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the hair at the root is corroded and pulled back, then you must put or lead a string of hemp to the root of the hair, and make the patient piss;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair is shaved off at the base of the penis which has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an abcess, then it is necessary that you shave with a razor while the veins are still tied up and the foreskin completely freed from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a difficult matter to discuss, then it is necessary that you shave with a scythe at the base of the penis and the hair.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and then, carefully separate them from each other, and dip a thin linen cloth in cold water, so that it does not burn immediately.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not unbound if it is like the other wounds.
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	However, when we perform this work of our own will and in particular for children, if it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not mention circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their laws, and we have only learned this through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have learned from the greatest masters and honorable men who practiced circumcision around the genitals, and in all novelties;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Since it is possible to cure with two leeches, and by chance if one of them bites the skin above and below, let him hold him back and delay him.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or he is recovered, and the pain is doubled, and the purification which comes from the penis is not yet assured at the tip of the member;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And the purification of the nail, by chance, has escaped him, and he corrects the work, and many times it happens that there is no need for purification and I have wanted; and I will tell you how to do it when you want to practice circumcision on yourself.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the washing that is done to all the body with force I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces are equally as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in one piece;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread is well threaded around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and be the way of the first work so that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not just tie the string around his penis so much, and then make him wait in all ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make him lie down between your hands straight, and rub the foreskin between your hands or cut your fingers so that the boy does not see them, nor any of the tools;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and blow or massage, and turn it up as high as the head of the penis is;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the foreskin with a double knot, then tie one end to the other;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it as two threads at the root and the middle finger, and insert between the two ties, then loosen the knot carefully from above, and turn the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	and let the blood flow little by little, for it is the cause of death.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on top of the powder I cover with a piece of wet dried-up rosin melted with rosewater, seasoned with good oil and fresh herbs, and leave it there until the next day, and the doctor treats it with other remedies until it is well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of treatment for this is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two shoulders should be relaxed and smooth, and the shoulders should be cut in the same way as always, evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the mistake in the treatment is when the liquid escapes through the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then you must stretch it with your finger so that the veins make an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and make it even, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, hold it with pliers, and then make it even.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they exceed three days, and that which is sore in the scrotum is swollen, if he leaves it so that the abscesses are calmed, and the scorching is light.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If you cover it as well as you can, and keep away from the part near the scrotum, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	So then the powder of things that cause a sore to heal, which we have spoken of as a treatment of powders, and if you cover it too much, and it goes up, it will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So then cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retentlement of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to an operation on a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or similar things, which we have spoken of in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine does not flow freely, and you see a retention because of a stone or a knothole in the bladder, so it is necessary that the patient be lying on his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let them lie on their backs, and extend their bellies from the back side, and restrain the patient so that they remain as much as possible.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then constrict the colon of the bladder to the excretion of stone above, so that the urine is discharged and;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must bring in the instrument that is called a syringe, from which there is this form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and be of fine lightweight silver, as the feathers of an owl;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and be of the length of a palm and a half, and be flexible at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the discharge of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip with a piece of wool or cotton, and dip the tip into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the superfluity of the lamp and pour it up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and inflate the bladder and foreskin with moist oil and olive oil and water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then insert the syringe lightly into the foreskin up to the root of the foreskin, then turn the foreskin over towards the bladder;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then fill the syringe up to just before the bladder, and let the patient go until it comes to the hollow thing, and if it is not done according to this order then it will turn around and go back;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then draw the thread through all the wool, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it, and let the urine run;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and begin the syringing as long as the bladder is empty, and equalize the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or sores come to the bladder, and it is swollen, and you see there distilling water and medicines, so do for all the instrument which is called "clepsydre", and that is like this:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if it has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	On one side, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the hair cut so that the medicine goes in such a way that it stops well the prick without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see to move your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter in the moisture, and push while moving which is above;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	you will draw out the moisture to the catheter, and then push hard the catheter above;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters, it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema with which one enemas the bladder:
si est ci:	If so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is of silver or of archchant, and this head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and the chin or the jawline;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a lamb's bladder and put the moisture that you have distended the bladder, then place it between the two breasts with a good double thread, and heat the moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then pour the distended bladder into the scrotum, then draw your hand over the bladder taking out all the moisture in turn, so that the patient feels that the moisture has been drawn into the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle on it, and pierce it roundly;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then pour in a strong thread into these perforations, then join the circle together as you would join a seam, and put inside it what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do so as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already spoken about the division of stones and their extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said about the difference between a stone in the kidney and all the signs, and that a stone must be operated on by cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder into the thin substance next to it like water in its thinness;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and I hold him back, and massage his penis, and I bend it many times, and then I rub it;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the end of these movements, the basis is broken;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and is lighter the healing of children until they are four years old, and is bitter in elders, and is like the moaning of those who are between juvenile and elderly.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and is lighter the cure of those who have a large stone, than that of those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with enemas, in order to remove all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never bothers to seek a stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and move him up and down, so that the stone comes out to the perfection of the bladder, and do not cut it from the top;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make him sit between your hands, and his legs are drawn up, so that the bladder hangs down;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then look into it and touch it;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in space, then hurry to cut off the stone above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not chide when you touch all of it, then wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the disease is difficult, or your middle finger, if the disease is in its infancy.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and put it on its foundation, and feel the stone, and when you feel it in your two hands, if the pain is at the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press toward your two hands, and the bottle away from where you see it cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and he commands that he extends the testes in his right hand above, and with his left hand hold the skin that is soothed by the testes on the part where one cuts.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then pour the semen, for this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And open between what is between the testes and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left hip;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be right on the stone, and your two hands be next to the foundation, and be the cut deep as the quantity of the stone allows, not too big;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance, the press if it must be who is or foundation, so that it jump out without work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and knows that there is a piece of stone or angle, and margins:
si est griés a issir;	if it grinds to issue;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is a piece of wood that seems like a nut, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	a cell then where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not grind, then you extract it on the claws that are like a file at the head, so that the stone does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you put on it an instrument of silver finely ground on the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot fix it like this, then open it with a sharp edge, and if it bleeds, then extract it with vinegar;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then bottle the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then push it out forcefully, and the smaller ones after if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If the stone is large, then it is necessary to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things come to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	where he dies, or his urine comes again quickly because the leg cannot hold it.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	however, you must try to pull it out with pliers, or cut it off with knives, as long as you pull it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have finished your work, if you apply the wound with oil and wine, or with oil and cold water and rosewater to calm the inflammation;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then remove the patient's bladder, and do not separate the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, so that it returns to its place well with oil and water, then cure it with unguent of honey and unguent of basil until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if abscesses come into the wound and putrefaction, and freezing of blood in the bladder, and is retained by this that the urine goes up, which is congealed in some way so that it does not go down with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	Now therefore you must put on poultices in the wound, and extract this blood, because if it remains, it corrupts the bladder and makes it pus:
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then raise the wound with water and earth and straw, and help him in all ways that you can until he is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And it is necessary that every day that you cure him, you bind his two legs and put the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	If the stone is small, and it is in the bladder, and it is pushed out, and the urine cannot come out:
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	If the cure for what I have said above, that you cut it many times, is a reason for this cure to be excused from cutting:
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proved this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron and forge it according to this form, and let it be III angles nailed in one piece of wood:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	and take a piece of leather and fasten it to the root of the penis so that it cannot move backwards towards the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then pour the liquor into the penis lightly until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and return the awl to your hand in the stone little by little, so that you can pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	so that urine will soon flow out, then press your hand on him who is delayed from the stone that is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it has been broken and gone flying with the urine, and the patient has relieved himself, he is cured;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot achieve this by any means so that it is damaged, then take a piece of leather and fasten it to the stone and another above it, then pull it out forcefully, and after removing the leather, clean the frozen blood that is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the healer as long as he remains healthy.
de la piere des femmes	from the woman's bone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	There is a chance that it will occur in women, and if it does not happen once, there is a great harm to the healer, and is defended by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	the first is that per adventure the woman is virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-informed who reveals herself to spooks, even if she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well-informed in this craft of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth way is that the woman's hand is more perfect than the man's hand, so that it covers it better and causes greater pain. And if necessity demands it, you should take a female healer who is well-informed, and not a male healer, for if you do not find one, there is no point in seeking one.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present a skilled dancer in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she do what you command of the extraction of stones;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and watch very well whether the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is convenient to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she pricks it, so that the finger is released from her grasp, and he recommends that she puts her finger or thumb in the malady, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder in form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she pricks it, so that she moves it with great force from the entry of the bladder to the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle part, where it is moved, and feel the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his two above the stone or cut off, and let it size the first small;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then bottle up pour on the waist, if you feel the stone so large the wound as the stone can come out again, and know that there are many ways of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	it is to say, small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the appearances so as to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if it does not go out, put on the vitriol burn, and keep it for an hour as long as the wound is not cured;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, as long as the stone is out, and have tools that I have told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it does not go out, and this is the artery that is cut off, put the powder on the spot and strain it from thick and thin, and do not recommence it, and leave the stone and do not extract it, except by accident the patient dies;
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire has subsided, and the blood has stopped flowing, if you return to your work, let the stone be far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	water is nothing but a collection of white or clear blood, which causes the dislocation of the joints, which contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "syfac", and never properly in the yolk of the egg, if one believes that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	is the skin of the joint between the white or clear blood that we have mentioned;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and if it does not come to nothing.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is so feeble that it comes from the utters, and that material is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And never by impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	where it is a color that changes to yellow, or is without red, or black, or white water, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of this collection, for if it is white or clear blood as we have said, then there is pain in the abscess, and a long poke as in an egg, and does not close the joints, because it has moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the own towel, then is the aposteme reason with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if there is moisture between the leather of the testicles and the white silk, then does he feel bad;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you want to know the color of the moisture, try it on all the intimate parts as much as possible so that its shape is in front.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the shell, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we heal him with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his power and the repletion of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then let him lie on his back, on a high thing, and cover him with a few blankets;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit down on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the stick to one of the 12 ribs on the side of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	and take the spatula, and peel the skin of the scrotum among it long to the tip of the penis, and be your cut all straight by dividing the skin of the scrotum until the white Syphac, and the scar slightly according Tom Pooir.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the Syphac clear of water to the large opening, and remove all the water, and then put your claws, and let the Syphac upstream;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the skin of the scrotum, but that the Syphac alone;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	and peel all or by pieces separately the skin of him subtilely, that if you do not peel it well bleeding, so will return the water;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the wind blows to your work, so you reset in its place when you have completed the work of the Syphac;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then join the two limbs at the knee joints with one seam, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the hock corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you hang the feet that are suspended, in doubt of the decay of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut off the leg at the suspension, and extract the hock, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the hock is assembled in two parts together, know that they are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	then cut off the other part as you did the first one, making it even, then wash the blood, and put in the wound another moist thing made of oil rosin;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put there another moist thing made of wine and oil, and put it on the two limbs, and put double drapings on top of them, and tie all the leg together in this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two drapes and employ them of woolen cloth according to this image and let them be sewn together in the throat of the breeches, and that one of the shoulders preaches on the foundation until the back, and the other at the part of the grip.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two shoulders on the two arms, and let all of it be assembled in the loop of the breeches;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no longer is this medicine of the fire cautery in the place of a iron bar, and it is that you press the cautery of the skin of the neck, and be heated as we have said, so that the white medicine that contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	so take this cautery according to this form, and pierce it with those needles, and burn it with the subtle cautery of fire:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And coat it in all ways that you can, until you have scorched everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and let the fire not touch the egg.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is safer.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and keep the blood from flowing out, and be careful about the work of cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess or the flow of blood or anything else, then heal what makes you contrary according to this which is before you said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not wait for this work because of its horror, then make a perforation, as I have said to you, and it is that when you are sure by the signs which we have said that the water is hot, then place the patient on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess from top to bottom all the way through the broad part, and make the perforation long with the lance;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the piercing wide so that all the water runs out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and then wrap cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let run the rest of the water, then cure as long as the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the towel does not let the water run out of the wound's mouth, then you must put in a tube or the instrument with which one draws off the water from the hydropses, so that it forms as before;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and open the wound wide, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after VI months or so turning inside out, and when it is assembled as before, and then the patient's days will pass;
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the severing of this limb there are many dispositions, so that I think it is better to leave it;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the cors, and most importantly the injections.
et c’est par mout de cas.	and this is because of moisture.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	That is to say, by acrid and sour water that spreads into the injections, or by impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the cors.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And does not indicate pain, and is an abscess of sadness;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are some abscesses that are painful and piercing, and of a purple color, and never come from an artery, or swelling in the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from an artery, if you know by the position of the abscess that it is hot, then when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and only touch it slightly.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	What is done by swelling in the vein is known by its expression when touching with the fingers, and one can make the size of this appearance, and of the other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and so you take care of the curings of the joints, then place the egg on top, and the trail further down from the white milk, and free the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already soaked with these new oils, then it is necessary that you then draw out the egg and the coating.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is white within, or in what is inside the containers, then you must free all of it, and the coating rolls around.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the horse is from behind, then you should cut it all, and remove the membrane, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then employ the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping that resembles a barnacle, with the softening of the joints, and the patient groans greatly when it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is very similar to that which we have described above, and we will tell you the way to do it according to what the old man did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	He should have you sit the patient on one side of the bed with his legs raised, then pour the potion of suspension between his thighs, all along the vessel that is near the penis, and spread it well on the skin.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	Then cut the skin with a sharp instrument on both sides of the vessel, as much as it is exposed, and then peel off each piece, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	Then take an needle where there is a double thread and tie it to the first place where the vein has been seen, and then quickly tie it to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them in the middle, correctly according to the length of the body, and thus extract the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as with others where a bow has been shot, so that no vessel churns and makes one of the testicles rot.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	Car by God it comes not of evil, and so all vessels come forth, if is necessary to draw the semen from all vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the oven does not lose its freshness because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	about the surgery of the sick
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The movements of this rat come about because of the incision that comes out or extends on the belly in the part of the anus, so that the intestines descend from that cut to one of the chambers;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this cut is where the pain comes from or because of the extension of it, and these two ways come about because of moisture from these two causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	Or because of impact, or leap, or braying, or lifting a burden, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	And the signs when it is an extension of pain, if it comes slowly and slowly, for a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the aposteme is even until almost at the end, so that the medicine hastens the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of syphilis that sudden pain comes, and the apostemes are different appearances, dislodging the skin; and this is due to the exit of the intestine and the body away from syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never do cut the circumcision with the intestine, and is held in-quest, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	For in these treatments of iron, for fear of which they must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way of the application is that you command the patient to hold the intestine in his hand at the bottom in the wound, if it can be forced in;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then put a cloth on top of his neck between your hands and gently press;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then pull the skin of the neck up, and cut all the long hair;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put inside the loin clothe from the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and be so that he can easily come out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the medicine that is on the skin of the loin, until the white medicine is completely uncovered from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then put your index finger in the opening of the loin, in what is between the white medicine that is uncovered from all sides, and in what is second, and leave what is behind the loins, and between the second;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and so move to the right hand side of the bed in front of the legs, and are the white skin up at your left hand, and lift the arm completely towards the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to extend the arm upwards, and carefully slide it behind the spine.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your two hands if there is any hard or tight thing wrapped around the intestines, and if you find nothing, pour in some wine.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a thick thread, and insert it into the back of the skin, which is after the sinew of the legs;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	then cut the threads that appear from the yarn, until there are four;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and sew the skin, which we have said is after the sinew of the legs, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	And wrap up the heads of the bones, and tie them together from two sides, so that no one of the servants who feed them can enter them, for it will not be possible to put in an abscess.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and tie them very tightly according to the first length of two lines, and after these two lines leave a space that is three fingers wide between the sides;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the rest according to the roundness that the elf carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut off the part that is next to the leather of the legs, until it stands out, and bends it, as we have said above;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then bring wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and put on the tie that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leaves the tie on him until he dies;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in the shoulder, so arise from hot water, and put on what we have said, until it feels hot.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to try to make the cure with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old people said that it is done in this way as the vine that ties the vine, so that you tie the branches, after the size of a little bit on the leg;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then take care of me, and heal the abscess of him who works, until the branches feel hot;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time comes when the wound ruptures in the flesh, as we have said, and opens up the veins;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not fall out any of the entrails, because it is a small thing, and repair every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and for all that if he lingers too long in this place, he believes the wound or sewage, as far as the intestines are coming out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and what happens because of the spreading of the sewage that is at the ankles, as we have said, because it is spread out, then it softens and swells the joints and opens them up;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment if it is by fire cautery, as we have previously said;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and no one is cured by iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient lies still on his back between your hands, then cover the site of the rupture with a large amount of three-parts;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the sewage that is attached to the skin that has been peeled, and then take the rag and put it on the site of the sewage;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it perfectly hard in the belly, then cut the two sites of the sewage on top of the rag, and cut each one;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then pull out the head with force, and do not cover with any medicine or extend the knife or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramose entrails.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Then cure with the cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the hair, if it is infected or healing the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ointment is constant and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is moist in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the crotch
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often the leather of the testicles is softened in some men, so that the spermatozoa inside are softened, and it can be seen;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when you treat him, to make the man lie down, and to pull off the skin which is softened on top of the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips with one stitch, and you will see, cut first the excess of the softened skin at three stitches or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then pull between the stitches, and treat it like other wounds, until it is healed, and let it ooze.
dou chastrement	Dou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	For if I were to say this, then it would be against our custom.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary for just two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	where one is that the mirror should answer when asked, and in a mirror's cure;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, for if we have often had a need to chastise certain animals to help us, as with rams and sheep and hogs and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that chastisement is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	where by attraction or by splitting apart.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do with attraction, let us sit the animal in hot water until its testicles are softened and while they are still soft;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then grab them with your hand, until they have healed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the lancing of wounds:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	You must take the best cow, and bring its hide to your left hand, then tie it up with the strap, and cut off each hoof when you have well skinned them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and I leave no hole of syrup or sugar which is over the veal;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this way of lancing is to be preferred over that which is done by attraction, for in the latter case there may be something about the hooves that causes the cow to crave luxuriance;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then heal the wound as long as it is well.
des hermofrodites	Of the chastisement of size: It is fitting that you anoint the bestial, and press the skin of the hoglets to your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cover each hoglet with I know not how many; leave no small poultice of the si-fac and sub-tifat which is on the vasselins; and this mode of chastisement is mature that which is done by attraction, for thisu that to the attraction remains by adventure nothing of the hoglets, by coi the bestial desires luxure; then heal the wound as long as it is healthy.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	the one if it is that between the two hooves as it is made by nature of a woman, or it have hair, and sometimes the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and has on the breast as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the healing of man and woman is that you cut off the hoofs together, and heal them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	In the second way, men whose urine jumps out of their loins, unless they are cured.
de la tentigene	of the tentacle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	The tail is tied to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have also great wonder at it, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you take the surplus of the tail to your hand or fingers, and make a small cut;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not cut too deep, that the blood does not flow much, then heal with another cure as long as it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another tail that is born in the mouth of the mare, and use it, and perhaps it will jump out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you need to cut it, as we have said about the tongue, and treat it until it is healthy.
de erratique	of irregular
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the hernia is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	And is natural by birth, or happens through disease that came to it;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	Or is made by the art of the jester, or by the subtle or specific medicine, and is made perfect in the mare, or in the coast, or dissection, or what not;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and can be conceived, and birth, and by chance flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is through the way of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	For if the stoop is close and apparent, whether it is at your two sides or above.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is subtle medicine, and it is near to leaves, if you hurry, and around thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	meet your two fingers together, and the woman be on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then are the two fingers formed, until the subtle medicine is running, and the support is removed;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, and wet it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie with each man every day, so that he cannot hold it together.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the remedy is harsh and thick, then it is necessary that you take a kind of spa water resembling a mint leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If he is stuck in a car, if he is suspended by the neck and the cloak.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and put medicines that stop the blood, if necessary, blood of dragon, incense, together with a lot of incense;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then provide a long, wide piece of cloth, so that the wound cannot heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it hang for a long time, and bring a tent made of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with other treatments until he is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	When the woman is pregnant, and you cover her according to this method, unless it is an abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For in the case of an abscess that is in the womb, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that require no surgery, and when hemorrhoids are old they become throbbing;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already said in the division the signs of disease, and the symptoms, and I will say here those that receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thump are perfect in the marriage, and they do not appear in feeling unless it is cured by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the vagina can be felt, and those who can be cured are cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, and tie her to the bed, and cover her with clothes, and powder her with medicines that stop the blood, if necessary, blood of dragon, incense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	Then put his feet on the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if the wound comes, so that the fat is poured out, then place it in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and thus, and apply it to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If this does not work, then place air cushions on his back and massage without hurting;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	Then take another one, and squeeze it to extract the juice of plantain or of gorse with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has healed, then treat the wound until it is well;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "spelt" is red, and is like to I sharp chief, so cover it as I have said in the recipe;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat him as long as he is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	the abscesses of the married woman
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Various kinds of abscesses come in the married woman, such as plaguey and piercing abscess, herpes and estias and fistula and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, it is necessary that in this treatise, the apothecary's cautery which comes to the femur, which is not a constant abscess but a burning one;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you know the work of fire, see if the abscesses are tender at the beginning of their appearance, and if they are hot and feverish, and if they turn red, then you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not hurry to pierce it, but let him die as long as the pain is not relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then make the patient sit down on two small seats, so that he leans his back and joins his legs away from the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and may their hips be spread out, and place their arms behind their knees, and tie them well with a good bond;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	Then suck the bile down towards the left coast, and I will prepare the instrument with which one works the mouth of the womb, from which comes this form thereafter.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see me prepare this instrument, that you put the point first in to test the depth of the womb so that what enters through the instrument comes out perfectly as it should and does not hurt the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, cover the depth of the womb with cloth so that the instrument does not hurt it.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top and dip the instrument into water.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens and you hold it with your hand, if it is necessary to cover the apex, the most painful part;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bow is empty, if it is necessary that you put in the wound wet rags soaked in oil of roses, or dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and put the poultice perfectly over the wound and peste on the wound and on the other hand clean rags wet with water or fried seeds;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the healer after two days of poulticing coming to this, as long as it is healthy;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and never raise the poultice and the wound by the use of water and honey, and then by water or long roots of lys and arislage are cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then recover to poulticing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healing in the scar, you must keep yourself from cooking with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	The first thing is for the woman who gives birth to know the signs of nature, and if you see her press down, and she desires to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	Then let the fire cautery be applied.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	And now I will tell you that these children are according to their natural figures, and this one comes out with its head, and the second with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, if you lightly press his belly, then that child will come soon;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends on its head, then the second with him, and thus cleanses the marriage of its excesses by good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and this one that comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it comes in no way on its feet, but comes on the chest or shoulder, and the hands, or comes on the belly, or sometimes, and is turned around by accident on the neck, and by other bad shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	so that you may dance wisely and cunningly in these things, and be warned of error and deception; and I will show you all the shapes how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If she falls forward by her own natural force, and the woman gives birth in pain, and her virtue is weak, so that it fails when she sits on a saddle or when women hold it.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and pour over her with oil or fennel seed that has been cooked, and then pour the balm between her two little spatulums whose form is described here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and split the second one, and cut off his fingernail until the moisture that causes it to crack comes out.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press on the woman's belly until the fetus moves, and if it does not move, then it is necessary to apply musk oil made from fenugreek with sesame oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her press and shake off the condensing, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	so that she may now deliver the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if both hands are hot, then you must repeat the process of gently squeezing them a little and a little:
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair and lift her feet up.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then remove the chair from under the woman, and tie her down so she doesn't stand up;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then cut the hands off with the knife that is placed in front, and pull out the baby, and cut it evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	in the delivery of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes on its feet, if you put a stick up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it back and forth until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and then stretch it out and bend it back and forth.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Until he jumps just as high as his knees, if you command him to jump, and make him shake with fear;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If he jumps, may God help him.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not turn out as we have said, then let it be turned little by little, until it is back in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For now it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if he does not come as we have said, then take musk of alyssum, and oil of sament, and gum melted, and grind it all together in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put on her nature within and without this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until she is soaked to the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is wet all over, she is given a chain of myrrh, and it is put on her, and she is left for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a seat, then make her shake and hold her mouth and nose, and press her belly lightly, for the child is coming now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child between his legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the baby comes in this form, if I put my hand on his head little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then be bound around his neck, and hang his feet down, and lie down on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend his hands little by little, and then press his hands on his belly, and pull out the bowels all at once, until she is emptied;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if it does not jump, then take its feet and move its body, then move its body above its belly, then put your hands on it.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and strike the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and command the woman to lean back as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	When the child is born with one hand extended,
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to learn how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then let the woman get up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then let her lie down on the bed, and make her stretch her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then arrange the muscles as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then let her sit on a chair, and study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and form the child according to its natural shape, and make it shake, and command the woman to lean back as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the baby's delivery through its mother's groin, and it spread its hands, and its face turned towards her back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the barber shave his hand, then turn it a little at a time, and wipe it lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, if he puts the musk that we have mentioned on top of it, and oil, then he orders her to move a little at a time;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, if you place it on a seat, and he orders her to lie down;
et la fai esternuer.	and make her shake.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same method for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When he comes in this way for the whole second time, if you cover your nail with it until the moisture is empty;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he puts it on his face and neck, and covers it up so that it cannot be held back, then the barber dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, until you have put it in as it should be, and order the woman to lie down once:
adonques si istra legierement.	So then it is lightened a little.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twin's issue
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	It is known that good things come often, and never more than three or four at a time;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	And this is not an unusual thing, and it rarely happens;
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are an unusual thing, and they never live, if only one were left;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, if they are multiplied, they are lost by the fire which devises them, which is tied to the lead;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	And never are they born naturally as all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	If they are born with pain, if the cure is as we have said, and let the wise doctor do it quickly and lightly;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and then do it so that it may be saved.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And never is it formed in the womb one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more than fifteen, and all are formed by the measurement of the wise glorious, and know the doctor everything, for by chance similar things might be there;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do as you see fit.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman who has given birth to a dead child or is pregnant and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if the woman is of sound health, and there is no accident that she might fear death from;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if the woman is pinned beneath her back and her hips are tilted downward, and her legs are raised up;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife ties the cords from both sides, so that she is tied to the bed, so as not to be treated for the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with ale and fenugreek seed and flaxseed, then ointment her hands with this oil and these muskellion seeds;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then pour into the woman's body lightly, and then see if the child is ready to be born, and take care that the baby is dressed properly so that it does not come out in pieces;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If he inserts the hairpins into his hair or into his neck or into his mouth or onto his cheek or onto his chin or near his sides, and the pins are inserted or pricked through the skin, then they must be cut off at the base and the blood should flow.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And he should hold the hairpin in his right hand and place the thumb of his left hand between the two fingers of his right hand, and grip it lightly with his entire hand, and insert the hairpin into any one of these places that we have described until he reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	This is the form of the hairpin:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then take another hairpin and place it in such a way that the pricks are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then stretch it evenly from one side to the other, so that it stands up, and fix the hairpins with their points in such a way that they cannot move, as follows:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some part of it remains, if he oil one of his two ends and bottles it up in that part, and draws the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there is no delay at all, he places this ointment or more high and does it until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back due to the tightness, then you must wrap it in a sheet until it comes out completely;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then take it in the joint of the sole or at the neck, and in this way you must do with the other hand, and with the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's shoulder is large and stuck in the exit, or has an acute joint assembled, then you must bottle the thorny sputum between your two joints, and cut off the joint and extract the thorn.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you have the instrument which is called "almahide", from which the form comes with the tools or paste which follows this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so also it makes the natural man sick.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then draw out the bones with nails, and the head of the shoulder is forced, so that it is cut, as much moisture comes out as possible.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces so that you can take it out.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or burst the ribs, so that it is necessary for you to pierce it as much as the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he falls on his feet, then is the light आकर्षण, and the treatment is at the mouth of the wound.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is stuck in the belly or in the foot, so that you can take it out with the cloth wrapped around your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut open the belly or the foot, as much moisture as comes out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is ossified and the shoulder remains in place, then pull the hand completely out of the socket and draw it up to the mouth of the socket.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then pour some wine or water onto one or two, and draw it forward.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the socket is constricted by an abscess that has come up, and it cannot work, then you must use moist and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and prepare poultices, and cut them into sharp, moistening, and soothing materials.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the hernia is on his rib cage, and you can make it flat, then prepare what we have said for the live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if you do not have the ability, then draw it forward piece by piece and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, prepare what we have said for short, sharp wounds that come in through the socket;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the blood flow comes from the wound, then it is put in water restraining, and other treatments are given.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb an infant had been killed, then consult another on that one, and kill the others.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the twenty feet came out of the boat, and they began to grow large.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, and I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong plaster, and after a few days more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for this belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want to stop the bleeding, and with my hands as soon as the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and waited for the woman long time then, and it was fixed a little bow from its place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not remembered this paste before that for one who, when the master tries an strange thing, he knows how to put help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the wife back to her bed
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here comes the form of the pressure, where we place the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and on two sides are two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns are thinner than the restringent, and it is made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube should be as wide as a palm, and the margin of the tree should be, and one palm and a half long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the two limbs are fixed by this means, which are bent in one and in the other, half a palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joins are inserted into the mouth of the jaw to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, its appearance being more subtle and lighter, is made of oak or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and has two joins, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the jaw opened by all the instrument, so place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and her legs open, then join the two joins together in the jaw, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then join your hand to all the instrument, as you did with the nails equally, according to the quantity that you saw the mouth of the jaw open, until the ball moves in place;
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	The instruments are all mounted upside down, and multiplied for their appearances.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you have set up the mirrors, so much faster is the operation, and higher are the men for their number.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I do not despair of the instrument, you have not prepared it well, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second is ready for birth, it is necessary that you instruct the woman to keep her hair in place, and then make her sneeze, and hold your hands away from her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she does not, well is it.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If she does not, I can take a piece of wood or a lid and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, like thyme, Rue, Anise, Chamomile, Cassia, and Cento;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or none of them, are boiled or poured in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a lid or a pot on it, and another one in her mouth, and make her swallow as the vapors come inside her;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	Then make it shake, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If a person has had surgery.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	If it remains after this treatment and is not well, order the patient to soak his left hand in oil of sesame or in musk of ale, and then put it back in its place, and then wants the second.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when he has found it, if he pulls it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the bones do not ache at extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but then move it lightly from side to side, and then stretch it;
si venra et se desaerdra.	then come and dislodge it.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the patient's mouth is closed due to extraction, we have said the treatment of shaking and fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not improve from all that we have said, then be careful not to fool around when you stretch it;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the mare, you bind him to the loins of the woman, and then cauterize with ointment tetrafarmaçon;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she will become pregnant and continue, and it will come strongly;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but then, when it comes to a bad smell in the stomach and head of the patient, and blisters the sick person.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So then are fitting fوميجations suitable for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	no one of the elders has tried smoke with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument to which you will add the smoke of the flowers and the second one if this is it:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And is it like to a dog, and put the head subtly in nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tan as long as it is spent, and restart another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had the fundament pierced, but they are softened by a subtle and safe poultice:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary for him to touch the medicine to his palm, and he does not touch it with his index finger, and he holds back the string that binds it so it doesn't touch;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dip in another moist liquid, made of wine and oil, and then the cure of ointment until he is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, put a splint on the leg, and let it hang by the hand, and be careful when it walks upstairs.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never does the cautery come from sudden inflammation of a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it is necessary to cover the sudden inflammation:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	then treat, as we have said, with the poultice of vinegar.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula at the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistula that comes from the fundament is nodation, and it hurts more than those that come from the fundament defuer, or in the space between the two parts, if to one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that nodation is old, if it is opened, and then wet with a warm white or yellow poultice, and never are these fistula persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are caused by that which he has or wind or fever when the sick makes an effusion, and by chance in jumping one down.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if there is a fistula that pierces just up to the bladder, and just up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and arrive just up to the junction of the thigh, and just up to the notch at the top of the chest.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus it is known if the fistula pierces down to the roots, and not if it pierces down:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and is when you blow on your little finger or root, and blow a fine needle of gold or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has a curve, and you blow a little piece of thread or hair from a horse as far as your finger can feel it:
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is neither an effusion nor a fever nor wind; as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	that it does not pierce
si te haste dou curer.	if you hurry to heal
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches just to the bladder or just to the urinary conduit, if then the urine jumps out, and cannot be held back by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced just up to the join of the thigh, if so be coming up just to the edge;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twist and the pain between the bones, if so be he has already bowing back, and does not want for medicine or suddenly by touch;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent sores there is no cure except work, and the vain vanity of foolish people who mix themselves up with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In that which is not persistent and not old, there is hope for health by fire, if so be as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and he lets his legs go up to his thighs, and his thighs bend towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour out a little water, or a little mud if there is twist, until you know where the pain comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain in the fundament, then it is necessary that you insert your index finger there, and you will feel that the tendon is pinched.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and see whether between your thumb and the wrist or between your index finger and the wrist there is pain, so you know that it is persistent.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not bother you, then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	By stretching it, one can perhaps heal some of them well, but this is little done;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that can be given is that if one heats the subtle cauldron according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and pour into it hot along the fistula, until it comes out from the fundament;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and make this two or three times, until you know that the scar tissue has been burned, which resembles a bird's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of tent-cloth immerses, until it has dried, and then the doctor of ointment rubs and dries.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healthy, then that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	For if not, there is no cure for him;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if he tenters between them and does not pierce until the back which is at the base, and between the two tents there is an thick covering of tar or syrup, and you see the fistula to that who comes out from under the covering with a cure;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the patch of the beginning of the fistula, and bottles immediately before the tent, and then the cure after, until it comes to the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be delivered, and he will be cured;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then the tar-cloth which is made like a feather seems, and there remains nothing of it.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood does not come out, and you cut between yourself and the work, then cauterize with fire or with bitter medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cure brings together two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	This is to know, the burning of these saddles, and the cooling of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the cure of wet tents dries or in a house cooked, until it gets hot, and those who have been burned are put into these saddles in the fire.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound of burning tar melting hard wood, and are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been reset, if it has healed properly and does not come out again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the very foundation of the body and is separated from the chest, then it should be cut off at the root, and such things should be dug out.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and within it is the cloth or the tar or the saddles, or it is ready to pierce, if there is not only a way of hope and faith, by the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you chop it just to the bone, or if you can put wet tents and cure it as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not chop too much in perfection that you cover the foundation which holds the ground, and come the excrements by the voluntary sense;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	and the doctor, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	If he should recover, then take off that covering and clean it thoroughly from the base, or with a cloth or some other instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	and burn up that wood which is in the wound, as well as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	and study to restore the wound and keep the fistula open at the base:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	for it is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never let the fistulas be made in this way:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and when you pierce a tent into the fistula, and it is or is attached to the base of the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top in this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour in water into it in two, and plug the tent into all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is piercing into the margin of the base from within, then pull out the thread of that pierced one, so that you pierce your finger or hand at the base:
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and train the head of wool, and join together the two shoulders, and hold one to the other, and leave it for a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain it once, until the wool has covered these joints that are between two, and have chafed;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound as long as it is souded and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if he is not too deeply imbedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not fit to make a cover with a perfect seam, and then heal, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spine with thorns that one makes a fistula if it is moistened with one, part and cut.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, so that we do not cover what we should not cover, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	The amputations are according to two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are inside the foundation, as a grain of resin, and have small and large ones, and cut short there, one or more, and are removed from the foundation and from the head of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are far away, if there is a little moisture, and again soon or a little yellow water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, so that you command the patient that he should sweat himself in the chambers as long as the foundations come out, and the children are born;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry and cut it like claws, or if you hold it with your nail, then chop it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and the ligature cannot keep them in place because of their moisture, take them with a towel, or cotton, or a piece of calico;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with your two hands, then chop them and powder them with any hot powders that are available as a cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterizing paste, for other cures until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if its foundation cannot be removed, then cauterize the patient with a hot blade and harshness so that it can wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	And if the patient is bleeding, and his vein is near the surface, then the cure is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	And you shall hold them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them off, then cure them as we have said, until they are healed, and do not make an incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary to bring the wound together in this way:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pass the thread over the top of the needle and pierce it from the other side, then return the two ends of the thread through the eye of the needle, and so it is wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and draw out the thread forming it, then tie the thread, and draw out the needle, and do so with all the others, and leave it there for to take away the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation with a wet cloth or oil rosin, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until it bleeds, and when they stop bleeding, if they are treated with ointment and other treatments until they are healed;
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying out in the intestines, and by necessity of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary that you hold the edge of a scalpel or your fingernail above it, which does not allow it to dry out;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and then treat it until it is hard as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot harden, if you begin to shave it more forcefully than before, until it bleeds again, and is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat him until he is well.
dou fremit	Do not sweat.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Flesh is a small thing that grows over the body, and it covers everything perfectly.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and there is no time when the wound does not ache, and one can feel it everywhere as if one were dead, and it goes all over the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the healer should take a feather from an goose, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that feather on the wound, until the purple circle surrounds the entire wound;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around all of the feather as you hold it all around the wound, and make it perfect, and clean the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, so make this of a dog's head or iron according to this form, and be subtle and run on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	do not pierce it, so that it does not fall apart, and it must be pressed.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the wound, as it is in front of or with fire of cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cautery
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	No silver clistere, or archaut, or melted arain, or metal;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and no small or large instruments are made from them according to the disease that they are used for.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	This is used therefore in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cautery small and great is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and I have seen a swelling or the belly is tied up, as you see it, and the navel is pierced inside;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and one of the ribs has a hole, and the other;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and the belly or a cow's bladder or parchment is put into one, and all small holes are pierced with a thin thread between each hole, then a strong knot is tied around the belly like a sheepskin, then it is sewn together;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, if the instrument lies in front of a strong thread, then cauterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil or ambergris or some other thing, then pour it lightly;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the ministers hold it with both hands until it is completely dry, then remove the cloth, and place the patient's legs against the wall, and let the medicine flow out, as much as it can;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night, that is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him with fire because of a disorder of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then wait until he is well again.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the cloth also be very thin like for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the shape of the thin cloth over the skin so that it is held back:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acomplement.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and according to how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acomplissement. Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acompliment. Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicament, selonc l'acompliment. Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblan
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when there is a simple wound where the bone is not broken, but take care for it may be from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large, and you doubt about the temp of an abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if the pain comes to the head so quickly after the wound, and is opposite to where the wound was made;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and denies himself wine and meat that is fattening.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not improve, if his flesh is growing less, and he does not drink wine or eat cheese;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put a hot cloth on the wound, if an abscess forms, wet it only with oil and then wrap it up, or with wine that is stinging.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no temp in it, if it lies still on the wound, not moved by air or powder, which I will speak of a little further on;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he has been burned, then put it on some ointments until he is well.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, as from a sword or similar weapon, and the lips cannot be joined by stretching, but must be joined with sutures, just as I say about abdominal wounds, from the stitch.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open and raw, and bleeding, and only holds but to a pok, then bind it up.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	Then treat the wound with medicine, and return to using hard food instead of soft leather, and instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, such as roasted meat and eggs, as well as poultry and other similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find leather putrefaction, and it does not touch the bone, then bind it firmly, and pour on it a strong solution, and then treat it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped with medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it displaced, then mend it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if that does not help, then apply fire to cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the cure is light.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and that you put this powder in so that the fire will move it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	take incense a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	Dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	burn the incense part, dragon's blood three parts, and the powder, and apply it to the wound, and tie it up tightly, until it heals well and joins together all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then he bandages it well, and leaves it undissolved, if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for the medicine should not be applied until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one use only live charm when incense or dragon's blood has moved the wound; but that fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, even slightly, then there is no need to apply this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put upon some garlic that has been infused, or grain of wheat made with water and honey, until it heals.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then the doctor prescribes other treatments as long as he is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the break in the bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with careful pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the breaks in the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound at the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is at the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the throat is severed.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a newborn, if there is no other device than to let the cure take place, and do not put anything restraining, because it harms the newborns and makes them retreat;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the newborns is cold, and their growth continues with the brain, which is the highest limb;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be hot, as warm water, and mixed with rosewater oil, and let it also be washed with fresh water, and other stones of the mines according to this way, and moistened with moisternails;
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bends, and then treat until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is full of bowels, then pierce her or lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, so she loses consciousness, and her pulse stops, and she is cauterized, then the profession of surgery must be done;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the larynx is cut, or the windpipe, and it is blocked up so that the meat goes down, then cut the windpipe at the base of the larynx, and do not touch the larynx but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then let it rest for some days, and then treat it with garlic until it is cured;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	And if the wound has impressed the bone, then cut it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, then cut them all off so that you cannot have it, and leave the wound to rot and putrid, and let the pus come out;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the ointment.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a cut from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look up at the patient's face:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh to its very heart, then do not put on the powder yet, nor bind it up so that it does not heal completely, and return to the body, and let the patient rest;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I will put on a healing ointment, and bind it up twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put raw wool in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more often;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If I do not come to spasm, or a bad tremor from the heart or any strange extraction of bone;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	And when you see these good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds with ointment and other remedies as long as he is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	And if it cannot be healed, and operates, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the healing is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is an incision with a knife or a spear, and it is simple, or deeper or on the back, then know the cure of this one who is ahead;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, from sewing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, from powder, and if it has entered the bone, and has broken it into pieces, then examine the wound, and the difficult cuts if they are dislocated;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, then let the wound fester, and let the extractions be equal.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds or other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement du ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the abdomen is great and painful and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from a large wound, sometimes the intestines break out or separate from one another, so that the entrails are broken up;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suture is more difficult, and there is no reason to put any less effort into a small wound than a large one, for if we do not sew them together inch by inch, the intestines will separate.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	so that the intestines swell up so that they feel cold, then put them back in place again, and for a small wound, because we leave it longer than the other wounds,
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	and know that the rupture of the abdomen has four ways to happen:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	The two common stitches are in the stitch of the womb, and the stitch of the other wounds of the chest and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and each of them is more appropriate with the stitch of the womb, and I will say one by one and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine out, and there is no need to mend it, this is done in one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in one of these two ways:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or II dry cloth in lukewarm water only, or cook it in lukewarm water and fenugreek and cumin and spices, and rinse the intestine until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never does this wine causing constriction, and it is bitter to the soul for expelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling subside, if you moisten the intestine with water or alcohol and cook the herbs, because by this is restricted the entrance to a small thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a little hole in the wound with the instrument with which one cuts the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to cut off what needs to be cut off, and we do not want to cut it unless there is a great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	is the instrument for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if it cuts from within towards the core and not away, and thus consider this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are protruding, if you can put it back in its natural place in its own proper place, for that is what needs to be done.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, it is convenient that you make the patient lie on her back, and raise her legs higher than her head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and the buttock higher than the lower parts, and likewise the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two parts so that you understand that the lower part should be higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and then it is necessary to treat what I say in great and painful wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds, however, you should prepare, then put your fingers between your hands and minister with them that which covers the whole rupture in your hand, and join the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common way of sutures, and it is that you should press a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound a space of one thread, and put in a needle there with a strong good thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the needle, which is inside the skin, as much as you make it pierce from that part, and join together the two heads of the needle with the three together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	Then the strain of a double thread enters the needle from both sides, then assembles the two shoulders of the wound in front, and then leaves a space of two, and puts another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then lay the thread down as you did with the first needle, and do not cease to do so according to what you have done with the needles, until all the wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be small and large, because small needles cover all the wound, and too large ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	so that they may be small;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and do not push the needles too far from the edge of the wound and the hide, so that they do not cover and open the wound before the suturing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cover the shoulders of the needles so that they do not wound the patient when he sleeps, and put blankets or sheets over the shoulders of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sewn up;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of sewing with needles is more appropriate for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two pieces of skin together with a strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these three together, then remove the needle from the part where you began, in the same way that one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space of about half an inch between each stitch;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch is suitable for a man who had a cut or a stab, which was cut with a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and it contained two palms' worth of bowels, and the wound ran into the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I took him into my care when it had been ## hours since the injury, and the wound was well-healed after fifteen days, so I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the miracle was that he died, and this was a wonder;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not heal it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is none to be found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and do not put on any cotton wool again that day, and wash it with honey water as long as it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the two proper ways to sew.
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and thread it from the outside part all the way inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the right side in the right way, so that the thread comes out on the opposite side from where you started sewing, threading the needle as you go, and piercing from the inside part all the way to the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the meaning of this stitch is that you also sew as the furrier does, and leave the thread on one side, and take it up on the other, until the stitching is finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, which is properly performed by Galen, is if it is so that there is no knot, the two parts are joined together naturally, and one of the heads is applied to the other head in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	insert an awl or needle near the center, and pierce it only slightly, leaving the two heads of the wound intact;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outer side only to the inner part, leaving the two heads of the wound intact; then
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and then the other from the outer side only to the inner part, in two other places that are on the opposite sides of the wound;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the method of suturing with blood, and it is the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galen says this word, and no one testifies that it should be done in such a way, that the thread has to be passed through two needles, or through each of them;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with needles;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitch is stronger than the others from the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments for the wound are such as they are for other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it, then put back the intestine and the stitch;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on the powder with a spreading tool, and if the fire has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound closes;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and clean the thread, and make the sutures tight, and apply the salve and the spice;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as for others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	And if you have no medicine, put on cotton wool, so that it begins to come off, and move it two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound will not become commingled with the principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten another light member with oil of thyme or rose oil, and put it between the arms, and cut off the joints;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it feels pain or inflammation in the balls, and many times happens, if the cataracts of black wine are washed away, and most often the inflammation comes up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	Since you have no need of other medicine in the various preparations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will connect with the main members, then it is convenient that you wet another light one in oil of tempere or hot rose oil, and put it around the ankles, and clean out the blisters; and if it feels pain or corruption in the balls, and often happens, if the clisterize of black wine soothes, and more often the corruption comes up to the intestines; and pierce them inside, and know that when this large intestine is, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar tissue jumps out of the wound, also put it back as with the intestines, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has become dry or black, then you must cut the black spot, because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the shoulder and the part of the wound to the side in order to ease the extraction when the scar tissue falls, and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the blister
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, then it can be restored in some cases, as I have seen that an honest man was pierced or stabbed by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and wind;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I shall employ whatever means I can to heal him, and I shall not cease from applying a course of treatment until he is well, and I shall bind up his wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw that the wound had healed, I doubted that the patient had ill in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no evil, but he delayed in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be tied in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take two big testicles, then assemble the lips of the wound, and when the testicles have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that it draws its mouth out;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then he covers the head, and that remains in place so that it cannot be separated, and then he puts another testicle after in the same way as before, until the wound is entirely covered;
et cout la plaie.	And bind up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If it burns in the intestine, and does no harm to the patient, and can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Take the end of this intestine thread that is separated from the rest, and then tie it onto an end of a fine twisted linen thread; then wrap the thread around the intestine, and cut it into sections, and then remove it from the incision.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing with needles is only useful if done according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	And if the wound is big and wide, mostly when it is in one of the small intestine grooves, there is no medicine that can help, except with carefulness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula, whether it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	are that all wounds or abscesses, when they heal, are called 'fistula' in general, and most when they have gone through the body and come out at the other end.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the true nature of a hard and white nodule, where there is no pain, and it is also smooth like the feathers of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and once in a clear bow, and another time thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and once pock, and another time enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and it does not hurt, it is only by one of VIII causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by small amount of blood or pus;
ou por sa malice;	or because of evil;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it is hard within and on the lips, so that it does not give birth to filth;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much bow;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the bones are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is in the way of poison;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late in digestion, and late in health, and runs away by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins where there are bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already explained all these reasons, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment of fistulas, which is done by manual labor.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula can occur in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	For there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the syphillus, or the intestine, or the bladder, or any of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is only one that comes to the principal member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are in this way are of great difficulty, and there is only work, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not come to the level that I have said, and you have pledged to cure it, and you see it clearly, then take a piece of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, touch it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if it is torn, so that the search for a thin tent of throw, because the throw folds itself inside the tangling.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula is broken in two places and you cannot well search for it by tents, if it clisters through one of the breaks, because the moisture goes so quickly from one break to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then search for it by your power, that you know if there are bones or nerves, and cut them through completely, and ask the patient very well whether he feels pain when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you know very well the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint or a nerve or an artery or a vein or any of the places that I have told you about, if it is in accordance with what I have told you, and take out the false joint and the corroded bones that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the cure as long as she is healed, and the fistula is very deep in a straight place, so that you cut it perfectly, as much as you can, then I put wet tents in medicine water, and bottle them up to the head of the fistula, as long as the medicine corrupts the excess that is delayed at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I put honeycombs in a fine cheese cloth, as long as it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this, then the cautery as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackening, then cut it as long as the corruption is all bone, then cure with honeycombs of fine cheesecloth as long as it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if he is not cured, and bend back as before, knowing that you have not gone far from the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it unveils and searches until you are at the base, and removes all the corruption, then restore the position;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is thus cured, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep that you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is another means than to ease it by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it with pliers, if you extract it with the suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, leaving none;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if moisture causes you to make a mistake and fear, and it becomes dry and solid, and deliver the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that prevents putrefaction, and let it be until the flesh has putrefied around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as of a leg or thigh, if you wait until the putrefaction is all over the bone, then mend the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is much decay of it and comes to little more than the root of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is convenient to cover all of it up to the point where there is decay, and then mend it until it is set;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg, so that you take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of about thirty years, who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered the body, so that the matter came out to the leg, and there was a large abscess, and he had no clear cause to open it;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the mirror by their madness turned up so high that it touched the abscesses, and consumed a great deal of matter, and became a fistula, and went out a great deal of pus and moisture from the heart.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many people were cured with it in two years, and I had no skill in the art of medicine until I was called to cure them, and I saw their leg and the medicines they used to cure themselves, and those who were cured by the pus that came out of their body.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his heart became red in youth, and had a yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of those clefts, and then I searched all the clefts, and I found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I hastened and went into one of the pustules as far as I could see a piece of bone, and I found it corroded and eaten away, and the corruption went all the way down to the bone.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew what had come out of the bone, and I took care that there should be no other corruption there, except for what I had taken out.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicine by long tenors, and could not bind it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the continuing corruption in the bone, and dried it, and then I put the bone back together, and leaned to bind the place;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not but that I copai an palm of the bone, and lead it away from all the molecule, then I restored it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he was healed and bound very well, and I did not need to reopen the wound except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car por l'evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l'os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n'ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l'aleir ne a venir.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any place of the chest, then it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a bandage, and stretch it out at the top of the bone that is opened, and command no one
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and join another chain of a larger length to the first one, and place it over the shoulder that is forward of the bone, and position the head, such that you drag the corrupt chain off the bone, and remove the head from above the spot where you see silk, so that the silk does not scratch the head.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and hold a stick or a wedge out of place to support the bone so as not to move the head.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to make silk visible and feelable as often as possible; and again and again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	If the bone is corrupted and does not open up, and corruption is in the middle or in part of it, then remove all of the head.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then hold out a stick out of place, and make silk run from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the silk come from the long end of the corruption, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if corruption is in the joint, then destroy the corrupted joint, and from the other side, keep the bone intact;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other pain than that of the joint;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if corruption is where the hand or foot is pricked, this is very strong, but you must still inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and wash it in all ways that you can, but the vein or nerve do not make you opposite;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the chisel and the nails to repair these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their size and fineness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each work there is a special tool;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and knows that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manner of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if he imagines the instrument which you have a trade according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head might be dislocated due to an abundance or deficiency of moisture, or due to heat or cold.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicine that corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, if you cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from death due to the malice, which is greater, of the failure of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the members become black, and that it seems to be burned by fire, and after this blackness, the corrosion of the member goes from member to member, and takes hold everywhere;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If you strike with copper, and if it is due to the piercing of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and adders and others, then the corrosion is at the head of the two parts, if the copper, and does not give them space to come until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes only to the hand, if the copper has reached the joint, so that the corrosion does not come only to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, if the copper has reached the neck;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the neck, then it is death, and you will only achieve one thing by measuring its strength.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	And so do not let the corrosion come to your feet:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and if it comes at the first joint, if the copper then goes beyond the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to your feet, if the copper reaches all your feet;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises up in the leg, so hit the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes up over the hip, so there is no other remedy except to make the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to wrap or sew the limb is that you tie it down and stretch it out, and extend one minister one of the limbs downstream, and another minister the other limb upstream, and you sever the bag which is between the two limbs at a wide gap, as far as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then wrap or sew it, and put a linen cloth on each side so that the silk does not touch the sound leg, and come to the patient with another wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the blood rushes out when you work, then quickly cauterize the leg with some restraining powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to him at home on a certain day:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a blackness that seemed like fireburn, and this corrosion came first to the bottom of his foot, so much that it discolored all the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the honourable man saw the corrosion, he covered the whole foot with it, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long after that the corrosion came again to his hand, and came to me, and I put on it things that rub, after washing the skin, and I could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he commanded me to cover his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of regaining the substance;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted also that if he were to cut his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was feeble;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he despaired all, and returned to his country, and he sewed his hand up with copper, and he was cured;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have told you this only so that if you should ever need to do something else, you will know how to do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and it remains so long that it causes great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it ruptures and perforates, and goes out through the belly, and remains stuck there, just as our serfs do;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is on top is as thin as silk curtains, and it does not corrode down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "clean", and is not called " fistula ";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure should be that you cut all around the skin, and most importantly when it is thin, just as we do with cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it should not be burned for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you have cut the skin so that it bleeds, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thin like a sheet of cloth, then treat it with a hot water bath.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 observe if the breasts are large, and the breast that is affected has a foul odor, then treat it with Egyptian medicine that is made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take the following: oil and lead oxide, mix them equally, and cook them in a pot over the fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take this according to your need, and make it in water and honey, and harden the inside, and extract the hole;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for two hours, then extract it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this mutch times, till the sinews be broken, and the bone come out;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and no time is hardened with water of ashes, when this medicine is present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from a vine's bark, and pour water on top, then let it flow, and harden, until you know the sinews are well broken;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then harden it with a little bit of ground limestone;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you harden it with honey and wine, that the honey's property of breaking and washing is present, and the wine makes the inside sour;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you have engaged that the breasts are well changed, if the plaster of those who make them be mixed with oil and wine, and made like this:
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you clisterize it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in the treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the chest is small, and the clister's hole does not enter, if it is widened with a little iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, as much as it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, so that the clister does not enter it by leaving a little space on either side, and if the hole where it enters is above or below the breast, so that the copers touch it;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is drawn to its full length, if it does not leave a gap.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the bottom string as you see, so arrange in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest level where it is, for when the bow is drawn to its full length, if it does not leave a gap; and if you cannot cover the bottom string as you see, so arrange in such a way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bow runs lightly downward, and does not leave anything of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidation medicines to put on the wound, and are on a linen cloth that covers all the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover as tightly as possible the hole on the side opposite the largest opening, since sewing together the linen cloth according to the amount of the hole, and place it on the hole on the wound in order to tighten the bow, and do not lift the large cloth before several days;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and those who are on the chest of the breastbone, often for cutting the bowels, and for what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or not digested or indigestive;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and how much of the medicine has spread out and you see the nature that rises on the chest of the breastbone, know that the breasts are already irritated, and bring the medicine;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then unbind it in the morning or on the third day, and when you undo the wound, if you change another cloth, and renew the poultice.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts are swollen and painful after many days, because her breasts do not ache.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long after the spring, so that you are not desperate for health because healing is close.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who delay healing their wounds and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and the bowels that are not digested rise from the chest after many days, knowing that the breasts are not irritated;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if it is delayed to hear from another, and is to be postponed, then such medicines are mixed wet in substance and dried in virtue, as the ointment finishes, for there is a great part of vinegar, and this is the hind medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take the dry medicine, and make it with oil of roses, and aromatize it with equal equal wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then the confit and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and that medicine makes honey cooked enriched, when the dry ointments are not present, or you take mirr and alloea and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey as soon as it comes out of the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then put it in a glue drape, and apply it to the breast, and never administer it without an oil base, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simple substances or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	break them up, and reduce them to a fine powder, and put on honey as I have said, and use it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure does not help, then know that corruption is complete, and it causes pain in the bone, or in the limbs, or in members;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panaritides is an abscess that may arise in the nail of the hand or foot, or perhaps in another two;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it has become infected and one does not pay attention, then it comes to an abscess, and causes great pain and heat as far as the root of the nail, and perhaps even the whole thing;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corruption extends to the bone, as much as it comes with a painful stink, and the two legs are wide apart, and the color is yellow;
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has accumulated under the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire cautery is a great help if the bone is sound, and the fingernail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the fingernail presses down on the wound, and begins to prick, and bleeds, then you must take off the fingernail that pricks the wound, and cut it short, and carefully and lightly cut the nail edge, and put burning and corrosive medicines on it to stop all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal with ointments as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then cut it and try hard, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the joint corrode, then cut it and try as hard as said above, then heal as long as it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is broken, and bruised, and smells of pain, then first you must heal it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and then cut the nail of the spur with a chisel from side to side above, and be careful that the chisel does not go all the way down to the claw, because if the patient feels too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if so, put something on that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	la douleur du bras endormi de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Le doigt qui pousse dans la main de certains hommes est complètement charnu, et par aventure il y a un os, et jamais une ongle, et aucun d'eux ne nait à la racine de la jointure, ou la naissance est chez certains hommes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	whoever is born in the middle of two bones does not move, and whoever is born at the joint between two bones may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the nail of him who is chubby is so light, in a certain way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it in its root with a wide chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	whoever is born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	if you keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born between two joints, you must first chop the flesh completely around the bone; then cut the bone with a suitable knife; and finally treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, by the joining of a wound, or by the burn of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	if you cover that which should be joined naturally, so that the shoulder is reset according to its natural shape;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	and put between two tarpaulins or drapelets moistened with oil so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	ou tu met entre dous pièces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leis soit soudés, si com il convient.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If it comes out of one of its two sides with the palm, if you hold it as it should be.
des vils	of evil
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	O you place between two thin pieces of felt, as long as the leeches are stuck together, just as it should be. There are large envelopes filled with melancholy excesses that come from many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And more comes in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry, than to others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should not administer any more purging remedy, but rather treat it with basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure for this is according to two ways:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that one copes them, and draws out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you open the vein and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size is according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	arise the first leg with very hot water, until the large sore is thin, and then draw out the leg of the sick from above the thigh down to the joint of the foot;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut the vein in one place, or in two places, or in three places of a large size, then slice and draw out the black blood strongly with your hand from one end to the other as much as the virtue of the disease can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and command that he be dyed with black tar;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and restart the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are empty, and pour on the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The treatment for this is done in this way:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	He should wash the patient's leg if there is hair on it, then dip or bathe it, and heat his leg with cold water until it becomes red, and the veins swell up;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	If you do not have a bath, if you heat it on the fire, and then cut the vein at the top of the shin at the knee joint, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	and soak the skin with honey, and burn the vein from each side until it feels like you are touching it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it turns red and black, and when it enters or leaves the skin so seems to us as a white rope;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then pour out the blood until it is removed from the skin, and then tighten it with a light pinch, then cut it into two pieces.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then burn the skin on the vein until it feels like you are touching it, then loosen it with your finger, as you have done, and tighten it with another pin.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another piece, or several, if you need them, then loosen it and cut it to the second size.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it from size to size until it is all out, then cut it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it up, then bind a needle to the whole thread very firmly, and tie it and pull it, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, neither can you pull nor lift it up, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have finished treating it, put wet wool covered with wine and oil on top of the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healthy again.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the eye is twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cover it up;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and pull it as we have said above.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron where the eye breaks out is curved, and do not cut, so that it does not break the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is a heavy corbel, because if it were thin, it would tear the vein, but if it were thick as we have said, and here is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and such a thing happens that the skin breaks out in a rash, as if it comes from within the body, creeping and winding its way between the skin and the bone.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes to the leg a very great inflammation, then the places change, and the vein begins to come out, also as a root from a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head is opened, if you wrap a piece of gauze around it from one and a half to two inches, and then bandage it to the leg, and every time there is no more of it, so wrap the gauze and bandage.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	And if it is too far away, so take a part of it, wrap it up again, and do not cover the rest as far as it comes out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you do this, get back into the cart, and cause infection and pus where it is, and bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because of which thing it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the throat, and nothing remains there or corrode.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and never once has this hand been treated when it was as long as X, or longer than X, and one hundred and ten years old at most, and when you cut it, if you bottle or pierce it, and pierce it up to the bone, so that everything goes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and let the matter that is inside become empty, and introduce at its place medicines causing pus no day, then heal it as you do with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	and never once has this hand rained, and least of all when it opens at the ankle joint or the foot, and it rains much from it, and it jumps out.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure the dislocations as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that hatch between leather and cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our country "beef disease", because it often affects the bulls, and is a small worm that emerges between the skin and the shell, going up and down all over the body, making holes where it goes, and jumping out again;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is infected with pus-like humors, such as come from worms, beetles, maggots and parasites;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and there is doubt about its malignity, because when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the eye, it may turn back and destroy the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him cure and draw out, you can do nothing except when he goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then it is necessary that you lay him on a firm tie tightly, then turn him over and draw him out hard, and turn his body inside out, and you will not find him, so burn him with fire all over, until he dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greater harm it does, if it turns the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	If you see the head of the shoulder near the oil, then hold back the dislocation with your hand, and push down hard;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and the patient should use medicines that dissolve the bad humors, and wash with meat juice that is rotten;
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a painful disease that affects some limbs and spreads from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I poked it again, and saw it go up as high as a worm does to the shoulder, quicker than anything else, like silver in motion when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	The pain left that place, and then it came into the shoulder, and soon after it spread throughout the whole body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	Then he told me that it twisted again around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how much this woman was moving her member from one to the other, for I had never seen such a thing with this disease.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had often heard that such pain can move from one part to another, but as I saw it in the woman's case;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	And I thought that perhaps because her chest was tight and the veins were visible, and perhaps because of the constricted windpipe;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	And I didn't see any reason for this in those who are healthy, whose chests are moist and whose veins are relaxed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	When you treat this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it comes again as we have said, let him lie down and keep him there until the constriction in the windpipe eases;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you don't see the hair, if the doctor who removes the wind with pills of rotten fruit, and pills of nettles, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the places where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity is that it is those who have large tips, small, hair, and soldered;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those who have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those where there are pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which does not move in any member so moves according to two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in a principal member it chieres as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, reins, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore chieres in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you hereafter, then you know it:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after many preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow has not been fully extracted, if you pull it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the skull when the arrow breaks and pierces the bone, and the wound is near the skull, is when there is a splitting and crushing and twisting and pain in the joints, and inflammation and swelling and pain in the tongue, and muscle spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perhaps it is not from the nose, or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is not from the throat or voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and in salt water there seems to be pus and it smells like burnt meat;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it scratches or pricks is that it is near the left breast, and also smells as if it were stuck in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and for fear it moves too, like a chicken, and with short breath and coldness comes and faints.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	For then you must know that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes is that it does not ooze pus from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gasps for breath and shivers with cold. So you should know that death looms.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow pierces through the skin and the bone, it is painful to touch the spot;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and sorrowful sighs;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and moves all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters the stomach, for fear that some of the meat is not digested.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters the abdomen and does not exit through the intestine, then there is no hope for recovery or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine flows out in spurts, causing the patient to urinate and feel great pain;
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	For that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member - the face and throat and shoulder and arm and spine and leg and foot, and similar limbs - are saved according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and does not cause venom, tell me how you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man who had an arrow pierce his throat and tear at the root of his neck;
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and took off the fat of the ear with a sharp blade, and was healed without feeling any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And throw an arrow that it falls in the grease of oil from paper dried, and the arrow was re-laid, and could not but the tip towards the fur, and it was the arrow great by an arch-turquoise, all I made to hear without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And the game was sane, and came no bad accident.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And threw an arrow into the throat of a Christian, and it was the arrow Arabic to ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loved the beards, and subtle as I threw it, and was sane the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And throw an arrow at the heart, that it was the chewed or stomach, and thought he died;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then that it passed XXX days, if did not change his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the arrow, and engaged it, and threw it hard, and came no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish for a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is seared above it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and delay the arrow within him, and do not hinder his natural dispositions, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I have another man, to whom an arrow has fallen into his face, and the wound is seared;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and so he delays not to suffer great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there was a man of the king's prince, whose arrow had gone astray and struck him in the neck, and he was slightly 기울 to the left side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was all turned around.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat after that which had been hit three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I wanted to give it all my care, and I did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a piercing pain and pain in his left ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the point of the arrow I put on the plaster with the medicinal herb, so that the legs do not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the leg of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put the plaster on both legs, and quickly healed the wound, and delayed it for a long time, so that the patient felt the arrow in his neck;
et il le me dist.	and he took it off.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put the corrosive medicinal paste on the wound, and tried it, and felt the tip of the arrow getting warmer at the joint;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted the opening of the wound with the corrosive medicinal paste, until the head of the arrow was clearly visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and the wounds heal well within three months, and then he opened the wound where I had tied the thorns, and stretched it from one side to the other, and could not draw out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	Then I ceased not to study and invent methods of instruments until I had obtained good hooks; according to what their form will be at the end of this chapter, I fixed them on, and repaired the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctor judged that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I repaired it then, and sewed up the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I have not told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you put your treatment on what I did not say, for the book cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the master physicians compare very little to what is present and failing, truly nine operations and nine instruments, at the dismemberment of strange things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows are of members where they are stuck except for two ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which is shot out by an arrow, is a transfixed arrow in its flesh, and never remains in one place now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not go out now, if you leave the flesh rotten within, and the hole is healed;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot go out, if you leave it like that for some days, and move every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it goes out, and if it does not go out, if you pierce within all the way up to a small hole, as long as the flesh within is stretched out, and then you let it go;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes down to one of the vents of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said can happen to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	If not extracted, but left until it is even after a few days, because if the arrow comes to the sinew, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is stuck only in the shoulder bone, and does not come to the syfac, and the patient remains for some days without any bad accident, then use the device to pull it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if she is wet and cannot be extracted, if you administer tar for her, as I told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the joint until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is stuck in the center, if it cannot be seen, seek it with all your strength;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if you extract it with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot extract it by the wound, and by the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein, then cut off as much of the wound as possible;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place, remove the bar that is stuck on both sides as far as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, as much as you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully although you do not break the arrow, that you draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot hold it once, then let it go until it is no longer painful, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the healing does not go well, bring what we have said in this chapter regarding the treatment with its paint;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and guard against cutting the nerve and the vein, and do not draw out the arrow with danger, soon or slowly, firmly or loudly;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and put the patient in the position he was in when the arrow entered, for that is the greatest help, and if you cannot do that, then follow the signs that the wound shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another way, where it does not open anything, or if the skin is swollen in a certain place, whether we see it or not:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	cut off then, as long as the pliers can take them, and then extract it:
si saut fuer maintenant.	If you jump now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand round, as far as it enters into the bone and broadens the bone, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she can't get out, keep her there for a while longer, and then start the extraction process again until she finally comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if he is stuck in the arrow, push him hard.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if he is stuck, you need to push him hard. If you push him with an instrument, so that the point of the arrow enters into the hole of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push away, and if the arrow is stuck, you push the instrument with a sharp point to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has touched something, it is necessary that you cut away all of the flesh around where the poison is; if you can do so, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow is stuck in the neck or the stomach or the bladder or the ribs, and it is coming out, you can cover it up. If you cover it up;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and don't forget to cover the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound. This is work for a doctor.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treatment until they are well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the clamps used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the piercing knife used is similar to an owl's feather, to pierce the tip of the arrow, as here is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the clamps for piercing and for extracting, if it is this, is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Of the veins of the torso, common:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	For veins that are healed are XXXI, where there is a head of XVI, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two batons which are after the ears, which are called "dous herbech".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in two nostrils of two hairs, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is under the brow;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two arteries which are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and they are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are dislocated from the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	the veins that are commonly spoken of are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cerebral vein, and it runs down on the left side, and it is called by lay people "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic veins, and it is called by lay people "vein of the wrist";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein lies on the right side, and it is called by lay people  "vein of the abdomen", and it is under the fascicle, and this is the one that is spoken of, which opens clearly over the breastbone.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the jugular vein is the vein that lies between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the foot is there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one if it is dislocated at the top of the left side pocket on the coast of the rib cage, and the second one which is at the ankle of the right leg.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called «nesse», which is in the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	the vein that is called «sainte», which is after the ears if it helps the old catarrh, and has a headache;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the saint, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a sharp cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then pull the patient's neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	keep them then in your two hands, and where you feel the pulse of one side dislocated, if it is a sign of pain;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and take the needle, and pierce through the vein up to the bone, and then lift your hand back all the way up, and cut and strip the flesh and the vein well, you must travel through it all, and let blood as much as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then extract and bind, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The two arteries that are in the two temples, so it is the age of the elderly, and the sight is dimmed, and the eyes are used to tears;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the seer is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient extracts his neck, until the two veins open;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse of your two fingers, and then sign with a knife;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	Then place the blade against the vein at the top of your index finger, and point it downward, and place the blade against the vein, and cut, just as you did in the other two veins, and pour blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then remove the bandage from the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then form the shape, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	And we have spoken of their treatment and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bloodletting from the forehead is as effective as that from the temple for the treatment of old diseases of the face and headaches, and for migraine;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient twists his neck so that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument called a "seeder", whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie the vein tightly until it is healed, and do not use a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it is not necessary for the flame to be too hot;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and heal across, because the bone is close together, and the flame may break if it is too narrow.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The two veins that are in the two laminae should be cauterized with oil, and with the tan, and with the redness, and with the blight in the oil, and with the diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their healing is that the patient's neck is drawn out by twisting it with a cord, as has been said;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	and then the medicine, and let the mediciner go through, a little of the long flame a little wide, because there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flame is thin, perhaps it will break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make the blood run, as much as you need to, and then put it on cotton, and put it well on.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The medicine of the vein of birth if it is good for acute fever and sudden sickness, and for face diseases, as headaches and pain that comes to the face, and indeed when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the medicine is that the patient strangles his neck, then bring the fire's thin flame to the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and the blood will begin to run now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and don't burn too much, and make the blood run according to your need, then let it sit for a night, because it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	is the shape of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	is the treatment of two kinds of fever, and also with the use of cautery, and many diseases, and pemphigus, and corrosives, and herpes, and are considered.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	is the quality of the medicine that is that the patient extracts his neck from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master standing over the patient's chest, and the patient cutting a long vein, then treating it with blood in moderation, or as much as necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then make another in the other vein, then tie up the arteries, and extract them slightly, so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Of the health of the lips, that they may not hurt themselves when eating in the mouth, and do not corrode the gums, nor tear the lips, nor cause pain or disease in them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the cure is to make the patient sit in front of you, and to tie his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left, and recognize them by the fact that they are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then tie them both, and if you don't recognize them and are in doubt, tie the larger one of each pair, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	the cure for the veins that are above the tongue after the cure of the cerebral vein, and it is at the extraction of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healer is that the patient dies between your hands in front of the sun, and he lowers his tongue, and looks down on everyone a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then heal them both, and do not be too confident, for arteries are fragile.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the leg, which are commonly treated, are healed according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or burn them all with a strong fire, or apply a subtle olive oil as thin veins are called "aneasil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and subtle according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the sharp, thick blade is called a 'flame', and it is wide as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And one should be skilled in opening flat-headed veins that contain thick blood and trouble;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	This is the form of the olive oil fire:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and is to save the veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood citron.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healer of the base, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that affect the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon that he heal the wound, and that he wash with water that is hot.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	If he stops the artery, and the blood comes running out, if it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be pricked with fire but cut off like a nail;
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the nail does not open clearly, you must extract it, and change it for another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you do not want any rain of it, or you heal in its place the vein at the base of the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut off with fire like we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you can see the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you extract the arm, and touch the place as much as you can feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	and then sign the neck of the chest, and then tie his arms, and cut the vein from the flame with a sharp knife.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to hurt yourself in the artery when you see the neck dislocated, because it is the artery:
eschui la donques.	so avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see coming out on top as urine from a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	so hurry up, and put your finger on top of it for a long time, then open your finger so that the blood does not flow, because it often happens:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	tie his arms, and leave them like that, and do not move the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood does not stop flowing and he bleeds, cut the artery, because the head of the shoulder is pulled back:
et estainche li sans.	and they stop breathing.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fir tree, and burn it, and take one half and put it on well until the other day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if they stop breathing, it is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, if the doctor, as we have said, with powders that stop breathing;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of breath is not done in many places for the small size of the wound, and the power of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein that comes out in the middle should be treated so that it stops bleeding from the top of the head and from the base of the neck, for it is composed of basilic and cerebral veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the doctor should be warred against the vein that comes out at the back of the neck, and if he cuts too much in perfection, the blood will flow from the nerve, and it will swell up and the patient's health will be broken, and perhaps will not heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men for its subtility, then you must cut off the limb with the saw.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and avoid the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two necks, then cut it short.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The removal of the cephalic nerve if it helps, that it does not move with the head, and aid the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to cut with fire at the olive or at the water fire, for this is the most saved of all veins, because it does not have a nerve nor an artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, you must choose the lighter way, and do not grieve anything if it fails the first time, and you start again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and perhaps the leg does not hurt in any men the first time, but it does not grieve anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about removal, if it is not done except to preserve health and avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the soldier be made in one of the three veins that are or cut.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	this is to say, cephalic, fast and basal;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the soldier must be made in the beginning of fasting, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and the soldier must be made on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The soldier who is administered with medicines has no determined urination, but that when the need arises, whether it is day or night, at all hours and in all seasons;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and does not fit to make the children until they are twelve years old, and a woman except for four months after giving birth until she is seven months pregnant.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The patient who is free from disease does not have a determined time limit, but when it comes to eating or drinking, it is in all hours and at all times; and one should not heal children until they are 12-13 years old, nor women who have been pregnant for less than four months until they are seven months pregnant. One should not heal the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when some must be made, in whatever way, it is necessary that he empty the bowels of a light enema, if there is retenes moisture, so that the veins do not attract the excess of noxious matter harmful to the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d'abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l'arme ou dou cors;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly the humors, for him shall be fat, through meat and drink and medicine, if you have such power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter or bathe, for nothing will benefit him, to subtilize his blood, and heal him of the vein at the pit of the stomach from within the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep yourself from work, from hunger, from lust, and from similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be quiet and still, and let the surgeon be higher than you who heals, and rub his arms twice or three times, then pull the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or short, it cannot run;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the cut with hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the surgeon's flame with a spot of old oil, and then put his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding, so that the vein does not break and bleed;
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee from the surgeon like strings, and some that are prone to bleeding, so that when one puts the flame on them, if one takes it away, the vein does not open, and thus one is of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens a vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in these things it is necessary that the patient be warned.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if he opens the vein for the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then start again a little bit further on that line or above hospital, if the leach is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the leech is inflamed and the patient hopes, let him be left for a day or two, and do not bandage his arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	so that there will come abscesses;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter or bathe again, and then start the treatment again if he wants:
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the dislocation is small, or the joint is slightly subluxated and you doubt that it will move as much as you see, then firmly in the same joint to all the flame right:
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a little surgery, so that the veins are swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the vein swollen, do not stop the bleeding, and put a little oil on it, because it cools the body of blood, and it is soft in this place where the oil is;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil to each vein that you are suturing in order to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this also makes the wound and the incision look better and smaller when it is put on it;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so that the hole is small and does not spread if it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there is an abscess that comes out often, especially when the opening of the vein is small, do not hurry and put wet sponge on it with a little heat and hold it in place for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the issue of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green, then it does not harm me;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on nothing but aloe or myrrh, juice of calamus, marjoram, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often an abscess and appearance to the disease of the temple:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	So then put your hand on it, and if you feel that the place is soft by the pressure of your hand, then this is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So avoid putting on anything we have said, because perhaps at the root of the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but the plaster dry to harden the place, then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And each person should be treated according to the quantity of his virtue and the color of his blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the root is black, let it go out as long as it is red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see a lump, let it grow until it is small.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are ill and need bloodletting, let them make the wound larger and wider the flames;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and let them bleed little and often, and they should bleed across rather than into; do not bleed them in a piercing manner.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	This method of bleeding is safe from the destruction of blood and the stretching of nerves, and it is better than long or broad bleeding.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for those whose hearts need to be bled, give them wet juice from pomegranate seeds;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is hot, three or four times; and if it is of cold complexion, before the bleeding give wet juice made from muscatel grapes, or honey-scented syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cumin, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it is the case that one has had a bout of diarrhea after eating bread made with three or four times the normal amount of grape juice, then it is right to drink beer and subtle, fragrant syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if one farts with the arms raised up and then begins to vomit at another time, when he is weakened by great vomiting, that he heal little by little, according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to vent his arms after the first wound, and he has a strong cord, so that he heals seven hours after the first wound, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to be wounded elsewhere, should be healed in two days or three.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For he has a fever that is hot inside the body, and brings forth heat.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and widen the hole as much as possible;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	Then you shall treat all the conditions of sickness, and place your hand on his pulse as he recovers, that death does not come to him in place of recovery, and that this happens many times, when the recovered person is neglected;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	And it is not necessary when you see the shoulder dislocated that you make him sneeze a second time, and the hole is closed, that you press firm upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	not if he is curved, that he extends his arm carefully, for that would be ill;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let him alone until he recovers a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you place the tip of the flame upon it so that the blood that is frozen at the dislocation of the vein comes out, and put there a little string soaked in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, let it go and do not tighten it, as long as the abscess is calm.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires to drain the blood a second time, if it is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is attached to the vein from which blood comes out.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of treatment is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the pulse is red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then cut with care so that the vein shows clearly, then treat now from above, not from the sides nor from the back;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	And make the hole wide, and treat well near the joint of the hand, and it cannot be taken out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	And if it has been cut, do not dip the hand in hot water again, for we dip it more when it is healing than when it is cut;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the treatment of this vein is safer than any other vein, as there are no arteries or nerves involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The treatment for all liver diseases with the right hand is as follows:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Estrain the hand, and dip it in hot water, until the vein is gone, if one can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and split it from side to side, and cut it all around, if it doesn't hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and don't cut it too much in detail, for the nerve is all exposed and then put the hand back in hot water, if it gets stuck in the wound, and cannot be taken out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, put oil and wax on it to make it strong; and do the same for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve for the left hand is good for the disease of the heart, and do the same as I told you before for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve for the foot is good for all kinds of diseases that come from the body, such as diseases of the bride, and restraining of flowers, and old diseases of the feet and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of the wound is that the patient dips some foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it stops, and puts on the joint at the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein if it is at the ankle, and then go up to the foot with many drops;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	治 the joint or more wide rain, or at the ankle, so you don't get hurt.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the toes that are dry, and treat it also across as in sowing.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the fire go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get it out, put the foot in water, and leave the vein well open.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you treat it for the first time, if you begin again on top of it a little bit after, because the leg is cold;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same for the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The blood vessels are at the ankles, and the pain in the knee joint is due to the blood leaving the leg when it is cut off.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of the treatment is that the patient enters or bathes, and removes from the ankle IV nails by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then treat it in all ways that you can, and crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and wait until you have sown it, because the leg is warm, and it has been well respired by many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, let there be no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the small toe, and guard against the heels.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make so much blood flow that you see it, and then loosen the ligature, and put on cotton and tighten it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	and now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	ventose
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vacuums are made of horns, or of horn, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and the vacuum is made according to two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by wounding and sucking up blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this suction that is without wounding is according to two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is all fire, or it is without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the suction that is made by wounding and sucking up blood is made in 12 parts of the body, so that one is all in the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the other two are on either side of the collar;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventouse (a suction device) from the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventose from the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventose on the arms;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction devices on the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction devices on the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction devices on the two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction treatment does not cause blood loss, unless it is a small vein that is spread out over the body, and for this reason it cannot be used; if it were done in the same way as a vein is treated in surgery.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	ne can be used either at full speed or at a slow pace, nor in any disease that comes from overconsumption, until the whole body is free of water.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, because of necessity or habit, we must use suction, let us do so every hour in the first half of the month, and then at the end, and also every 10 days, gradually increasing it;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they have work to do with wind, become very heavy.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who, through the hot wind, get redness and pain in their face, and in their head, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who, after blowing, have a drop of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has fled, and are thirsty for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are those who dream, and see vision, and hear, and die, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and in particular when it is the middle of the month, we order them to belch after three hours from day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The danger of the wind to the head ... which comes with the eyes and does not come until all the blood has been evacuated from the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this wind-blowing is in the place of the headache of the head, and does not come until those who are of a cold constitution use it, or who have had a fever, for that does them much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and so it is not fitting that I should keep you awake when you are using it, or those who have a chief cold disease.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are recovering from it often become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little further downstream due to the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The wind and heat are in the place of the neck and base of the skull, and for this reason they cause extraction of the tooth, and cutting of the canal of the gums, and itching, and filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and so it is necessary to press it in, for if it holds too tightly, then it will cause pain or injury to the stomach and body.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The wind and heat are in the neck region, causing pain in the head, blindness and dizziness, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and are in the place of the base of the skull.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is fitting that you command the doctor to press his hand upon it, so that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause movement of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The windings of the throat are affected by disease of the mouth, and corrosion of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is in the area of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind-puctions of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The windings of the arms are affected as much as three veins of the arms, because they attract blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the patient that he not cut too deeply, for his vessels are naked of cover, and know how to cut the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The windpipe that is on the chest is affected by diseases from the fundament, and similar diseases, and it is necessary that the windpipe be large, and of air, that it has the function of good breathing;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and if it is thin, then it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The legs' windpipes open widely, because they attract blood from all the body, and are the cause of ancient pains in the kidneys, and of the womb, and of the bladder, and cause the flowers to return;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in the second place of the feet, and of the toes, and yet they weaken the heart after a long time, and bring about many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of putting on the suction cup is that you put it first in place, and suck it quickly, and put it there firmly, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the color of the heart red and inflamed, and notice the pain of the wound;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then take off the suction cups, and take care in the disposition of the hearts, for there are some who have bitter character, and clear ones:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to wound even once, and to make deep wounds, and a little bit deeper:
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the man is fat, then it is necessary to wound him twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time for subtlety the way of blood big.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if it is very thick, then you must wound a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we only have to press firmly once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we want to draw blood, then we must begin again often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, then we must press firmly and fully, and the end should be that the piercing is sudden, and for those who have hard and dry skin, you should wet the leather with oil that opens and dissolves:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in a place of salt, of olive oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the eye, with oil of watercress, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the overflow is thick and cold, then take oil of almonds, or of balm, or oil of anise, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the patient's skin is very dry and scaly, then one should not use oil, but it must be washed after the wound has healed with rosewater, or cold water, or water from mulberries, or water from cucumbers, or water from porcelain, or something similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have too much moisture, if it comes out like this, or with water from myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great excesses stand up with wine of oak, or water of thistle, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or others similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and they should not be washed with a vacuum before the bath or in the bath, but an hour or two after the bath;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and they should not sleep after vacuuming, and it is necessary that he warm himself up when he needs to be vacuumed and when he has been vacuumed;
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard those who are being treated for colitis, and their bowels are too strong and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he needs to drink cold things, such as pomegranate, endive, and lettuce leaves in vinegar, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and sweeten them with honey, and cheese, and meat that is moist.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a pale complexion, if they drink syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and sweeten them with honey, and with honey and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on days when he feels better, he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is good to give some people twice or three times the usual amount of ale or musk before or after the wind-up, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be careful with the wine, but it is good that those who are warm drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The wind-up that does not hurt are those put on the liver, and the neck, and podagre, and the belly, and the bum, and the knees, and the ankles, for this limb does not suffer to be hurt on the outside, and we put it on the breasts when it is not well;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscous substance that is in the limb, as we put wind-ups on the belly and the bum to strengthen the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if it is removed by its attracting virtue from the operation, or removes the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and so let him do as follows when he puts it on the liver and on the mouse if there is wind held back, and these windpumps are empty with just enough air to blow.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and never are they put together fire, and no times the water of the river is not emptied, if as in the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way that the windpump is filled with hot water or water in which he has boiled herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup is administered to fire as such:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has II fingers wide and half a palm in length, and is placed around the middle with a small opening, just as to fit an needle, and is made of brass, so that it does not burn the patient when put on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the middle has a bar of brass or iron, so that a clump is taken up, and are great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For children's suckers are different from old ones, and leaner than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should place this sucker on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the wax candle or thread and put it through the hole in the center of the suction cup so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and these two should be at the bottom that we have said, so that when you break it, if there is steam, and then remove the suction cup.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the thread as before, and restart it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup that is amended in disease of pleurisy, to all water, has no hole or break, and is amended only when it is plain of water, and is put on the limb as little as possible.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	are not increased in size except for limbs that cannot be fitted with suction cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar things;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the naked legs of a horse, such as two or three-year-olds, and others similar;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find swells that are in clear, flowing water free from pollution, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place them in clear, flowing water until they are well-fed and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then is cleansed from the wound and the suction cup, and then rub the limb until it is red, and place the swells on them;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they have healed and are cheerful, and if it can take a suction cup, it is placed on it, for that is worth more afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise up the bed, then water, very well, and then press.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the bed is too high after the heart of the body, then dip the sheet in cold water and put it on, until the heart is dry.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are many hearts, then put on vitriolic powder or gall, and similar things, until they are dry.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you may put half of peeled peas on the bed, and let them burn there at the heat, now they will be dried.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, then take another heart.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the hearts do not take shape, then rub the bed with cold blood, or you may put an needle there until the heart burns, and then put them on, and sometimes when they feel the blood, they will burn.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see them chattering, if powder on a little aloe and seared, or ash, if they chatter now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapters on this chapter are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a remedy for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know this, o ignorant one, that the wise man will pour this paste on himself, which no ancient book or letter has ever mentioned.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good of it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing about it, except for the science of the ancient books, which I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by habit, and by my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this paste what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and have clearly set forth the forms of the instruments that are prepared, as I did in these two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters where the sage places his understanding, and delays on truth, so that those who are proved may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or strain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to save the sick person on one side and the other, if nothing else stops you, so as not to weaken the corset, or entangle it, or grow old;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or its tension is too loose or too tight.
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and do not drink too much wine, nor drink any greasy foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of the warmth of the abscess, or of the spreading of the substance in the limb.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the sick person returns to his normal state of health under your care;
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with meat that is very fat, or with viscous food, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and beans, and pies, and porridge made from veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar foods.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a slow healing will be delayed and slower the break will heal.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old and decrepit people cannot be healed or made strong again by their own nature because of the loss of members, nor those which are too tender, as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but doesn't heal, go up on the broken bone and thick tendons that hurt and join the limb together again, as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and doesn't do his job at all, and for this reason he needs to grow large amounts of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breakers are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break in the head is different from the break in the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of breaking.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the root, and another in grinding, as when one trims the tip of a feather to write with it.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if a break is with a wound, and a break is all a little crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each type has its own tool for repair, and its own special method, according to what comes to mind in his memory;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the broken bone is known by how twisted it is, and opens well from the outside, and is pressed together by the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or misalignment, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can also have twisting, or a crack, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move it with your hand, but put on the medicines that come after this, and then now restrain it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that has happened in the middle of the joint, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to make them even, so that the scar comes out straight;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if the abscesses are hot, if he does not leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are quiet.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then put it on the fire as soon as possible and cut it with a sharp knife, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration of that which has pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then tighten it, as it will come loose again later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if it is joined by two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or a string, or a cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the member back in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are healed, you remove all the additions by fire as soon as possible, and be careful not to cause any additional pain or injury to the patient with your work.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and set well the two bones together according to their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	and feel with your hand whether it seems to you that it is not well
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it feels good, and do not pull too much, nor press so hard as those who work with an abscess make the member hot and contractile, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	and when the member is in order, teach the patient to keep it still, neither watching nor sleeping, nor turning over, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the member be so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, if it is not in order, and you should put it in such a position that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and keep in mind that it be placed correctly, so that twists do not come when it is reset;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that broken members are different in smallness and greatness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	Because there are small limbs, like arms and legs and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	so that one covers them with soft and thin linen cloth;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those who are fat, like thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	so that one covers them with a wide and hard linen cloth, because the wide linens embrace the entire large member and hold it evenly so that there is no gap:
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	and then tie it lightly, three or four times according to the member, and tighten the linen around the hand, then go up over the break and tighten it less, so that the break then comes away a little:
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the linen a little at a time until you press a lot of the skin, then take another linen and tie it very tightly over the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	And then return to the part of the shoulder from the break, and hold it gently, not too strong or too lightly, as we have said in the first hour above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then place between the ligatures of linen or drapery, until it is completely even, and then tie it all together with a bendage, and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	If there is an abscess or swelling, place something soothing on the abscess to soothe it and let the swelling go down, and leave it like that for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then set it upon your splints, and be they of half a pole-length of rope, or of a beam from which chisels are made, or of palm branches, and be they according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	However, it is necessary that the splint that one sets upon the break be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and so long as the member is small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold it by the joints also as you did with the first line, then tie it together in advance, like in the first line on the breaking.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	then the tighter the better; and then a little looser;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and the thread should be fine, not too thick nor too thin, and made of linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is too thick, like I have seen in the work of some foolish people who make their ligatures with linen twine, and that is a great mistake, because the ligature cannot be even if it is too thin, and there should be less than two inches of space between each joint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is stabbed by the chisels of the stiles after the extraction in their healthy places, then set them with a linen patch or another clean cloth so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the suture is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not convenient to extract all the members of the broken limb on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, it is not good to put in joint before five or seven days, or more according to your judgment of the abscess heating up suddenly;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and show us the way of the ancient plasterers to restore fractures, dislocations, and torments:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and this is what you take from the flour that clings to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and put this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring fractures in many ways, especially for women and small children, because there is no too short or too long.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of plastering to restore fracture, dislocation, and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	Take Z abarices, and Ladaniya, and Enule, and Asafetida, and Indian gum, and Moghrat, in X z;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	Mirra and Aloes, in V z;
alechil VIIII З.;	Aloes, in VIII z;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and reduce it to powder, and mix it with plenty of egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	If the man's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly heals broken bones, benefiting many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another method of using plaster that benefits twisting:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mold and beeswax, half-and-half;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Sandalwood and holly leaves, eight parts;
acaice VI З.;	Resin, six parts;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Grind well, and mix with strong wine or water, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way to make plaster for joints and bones that have come out of place, so as to soothe the pain immediately, and to fix the size of the break:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take another new thing, and moisten it well with warm oil, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Do not return to bed until they have healed completely; it is good for soothing an abscess, and properly relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way to make plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves, and earth-pavement leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for healing bone breaks and alleviating pain left over from abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take the roots of marsh mallows, chamomile, violets, flour of vesce, of each one a part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind them, and mix it with wine, and warm the members, and mix it with water of coriander or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make an ointment that is stronger than the first one, which is used when the pain from the abscess lasts for a long time and needs to be healed quickly.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take the roots of marsh mallows, and flax seed, and hollyhock, and milkwort, and dogbane, and violet flowers and chamomile, of each one a part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind them, and mix it with salt water, or sweet water, or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras says that one should not put anything on a broken member before the scar tissue is formed, except for a wax and oil cerote, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to me that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things that are a little warm, such as mirr, and aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way of making an ointment that is useful for injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take moss and hair of the beard, or feathers of an owl, and marsh mallows, and mix them together evenly, grind them, and make an ointment and spread it on his chest.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then let it rest for a little while, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does his bone move from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if you do not rest by hand for days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain or itching comes to the place, or if it swells, do not delay, and dislodge it, and apply the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with spring water or rose oil, and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and let rest the inflammation of the member, and be relieved of the pain, then begin again gently, and a little plaster, and do not pull it so hard as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and carefully as long as it is sound.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is warm and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need to apply ointment and bandages, then if it starts again, as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	If the limb does not respond to any of the above treatments, only then should it be dislocated after three, four, five, or seven days;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never leave it for more than 20 days, according to what we have seen, until the break becomes visible and the joint comes closer to the shoulder;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then pull harder on the second, and fatten his flesh as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see that it is not necessary to reset the shoulder, know that it will not come back on its own;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then dip the shoulder in hot water each time you dislocate it, every third day, and leave it soaked for a short while;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this treatment the rebound should be prevented from happening again to the limb, and carefully restore any deformity that has occurred;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is bad, and if it is over-anxious, and I see no other thing but to allow it to relax and do it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the various ways of breaking.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breaking, and various shapes, and the causes are different;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For there are fractures that are made by the impact of a spear, and the collarbone is broken all the way down to the shoulder which is dislocated, like a hat or it was before;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for this reason this manner of breaking is called "fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the spear pierces the bone from above and is called in this way "absolute fracture";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	And it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a percussion within, or a split or a collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing breaking, which approaches to the tendon that is out of the socket, or which is upon the bone, and this wound is great or little.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if a wound that is healed in the bone is as fine as a hair, and is called in this way "capillary fracture";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by falling, or by some other thing, and a piece of bone enters it, and the bones are bent so as to form a knot, like the smith when he works on the kettles;
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the stone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens to those who have their chins wet with a wound, so that the bone is bent like a child's chin;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are made which are like dice;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	I will speak to him in his own language.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways to break it by pulling on them, and by the investigation, and by the rotten cart which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by the fact that when we uncover the bone, and we rub it from above, if we open the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for a fracture, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of feeling, stiffness, palms, fever, hair becoming long and red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, so cannot be cured by doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a possible accident, and you expect salvation, begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the break comes first to you, and it is in winter, so it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourth day at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, so you hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the bone's thread does not corrode, and the accident that we have mentioned comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone of the fracture comes up to the hair that covers the skull, then you should split the part that is split thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you should press the chin of the sick person so as not to move it, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on top of the wound more than a hand's width, since the blood comes out at the place where the skin is separated from the bone, or an abscess; help him with what is needed, and fill the space with wet towels dipped in oil and rosin;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscess has subsided, and be sure to prevent blood loss.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to cut into the bone, and it is done according to two ways of working:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is that you chop with a narrow blade in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then another way is more grant than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	the second way is that you have a number of different blades, some narrow and others wide, some pointed, and all made of iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in working lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is tough and hard, it is necessary that you pierce into it, so that you introduce the blades with care, not making them completely round so as not to pierce through the bone itself, and there should be a notch or a circle on top of the blade, so that it does not go through the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and there may be many consequences, so that each comes to its place in the center of the bone, so that you have time for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of the three ways to slow down:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing inside the bone is that you place the retainer on the bone, and turn it back two times as long as you feel the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then remove the retainer to another part a little way away, and do it all around, then cut out the space of the bone that is between the perforations, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools you have, such as pliers, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and make sure you do not touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have the bone pierced and treated, if it seems to you that you should rest the edge of the bone, which is delayed from the bone by all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and thinner than the other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if it does not lag behind any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly cut with tools;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then heal the wound with tent and oil that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other way to work if it is that which Galen says, which is more dangerous;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the loa very strong, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break opens, so that when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped incision, from which it takes its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and this side is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then forge with a small mallet above, so that you lightly chip the bone all around, and take good care of the chisel that is discolored;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is a fracture to the bone, then let it be light, for the bone that is well-healed does not cause pain and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone does not break through the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then cover them with a thin rasper, of which you must have various quantities, to apply in each place the most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have several thin rasers, and then more fine ones, and do not stop doing this as long as it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair losses and subtle cuts, you must bring together the cause according to its position;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	This is not easily answered by anyone who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the syphilus is discovered, then let you take a linen bandage, according to the quantity of the wound, and oil in it and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another bandage doubled II or III times, and oil in it and wine, and put it on the first bandage; then let you bind it up tightly with a band;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do it as lightly as you can so that you do not aggravate the syphilus, then bind it with one more linen bandage, and do not strip it off before it has healed the wound completely;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it so for a day or two, until the abscesses have become calm, then remove it, and administer medicines as roots of licorice, and flour of almonds, and incense powder, and aromatic wine, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer it again with powerful medicines without stinging;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard that the wound is clean, so you do not leave it oozing, nor do you let any bowels assemble on the cloth of the skull, for if they corrode and penetrate, they cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one applies a mordantic substance, it may burn from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Watch out therefore, so that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if black comes out only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has power, then you should squeeze a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one drachm of resin, and mix it with oil; and put it on the medicine
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the cure with the manner of cures that he knows, until it is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that neither time are broken the two parts of the neck above, or one by itself, because they are bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and this shoulder is cartilaginous and does not break unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you plug your little finger or the tip of the neck, and make it even within your index finger, and at the back by defect, until the neck revives according to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if his break is in the upper part of the neck and cannot return to its place, know that you put it equal to the head of a stick a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the broken part is of two sides, do it otherwise, and make haste to restore the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscesses have subsided, then bind the head with linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Or you bind one to another, if the fracture is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and may the bandages be so thick that they fill the apertures of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that one must dampen the strips to make them soft, and change them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It seems to me that this is not good, but it will be if they are wet with the ash of oak and the powder of mulberry.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	Then remove the bandages when the bone is hard and the joints toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never bind the neck with goose feathers in place of bandages, and if a wound needs wrapping several times, and the fracture is mended, and blow on the patient.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or make the knot well so that you can see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess forms while you are operating, put cotton soaked in oil or a poultice of blood-root, or a small patch of dyak.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscesses don't come out, then wet plaster with flour from wheat and incense powder, mixed with sheep's dung, and put on light coats, and tie no loops.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the fracture of the bones is small, and they are broken into small pieces, then extract them with suitable instruments for this, then cut off the piece, and treat the injured parts with suitable plasters and oils.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is no pain inside the bones, then treat the outside, and put on plaster until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	From the rupture of the jaw.
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not too large, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inside, then one must take care lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, when the fracture is on the right side, that you pierce your little finger with a needle on the patient's left side.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	And if the fracture is on the left mandible, then pierce your little finger on the right side with a needle, and pierce the fracture lightly, and do it with the other hand on the opposite side, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is in two parts, then you should bring them together with two extensions, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement of the deeps comes, or a rupture, if it is drawn from a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw with cerot, and put on a double drape.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put on the drape a great well-made stele, or a piece of leather even, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the musket you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure has changed, if you release it on the third day, and then reset to its place what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with much ash or flour of straw, after that you have removed the cerot;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on the other plaster a light thing, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as he is healthy;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Many times are saned in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if you see that the figure [of the wound] changes, if you desalinate at the third day, and then put back to place what has changed; and apply plaster, of the powder of the mill with much salt or flour of sisament, after you have taken out the cerote; and put on the other light plaster, and if the plaster applies itself, and the disposition of the ill one does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; many times is healthy in III weeks.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and a wound together, do not repair it with a bone piece;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	if subtile of the oster as instruments convenient to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, expand it with fire according to necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have all the pieces of bone together, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent infection, until it is healed.
de la forcele	(Here comes the end)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The force him to break many times before, around the shoulder, and the break is so according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and torn in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lightest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the overtures are so when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one twists the shoulder that does not break with force;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck toward the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then set equal the break on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or twist.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you are skilled at making it larger, then put a round staff of linen or cloth on the shoulder of the patient, and make it as big as you need.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and keep the force on, and hold the staff at your side, so that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the spear out to the end, so that it comes completely off, it is appropriate for the patient to lie down on his back, and put the shoulder with the help of a minister, and hold the shoulder away, until the bone of the spear is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then place the break at your sides, and if you find any debris, then cut on top of it;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and work the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then take a patch to one of the incisions you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but put aside this forcep instrument, for surgery.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should be like a spoon, and not too narrow, and as wide as is necessary according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and there are two heads, so that you see them, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, just like the split in the wound you made when you broke the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you have heated the abscess to the point where it splits open, and the split is small, or if you doubt about heating the abscess, then wrap it in a cloth or tent according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you moisten it with oil, honey, and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no bruising, is that you put on the bone the powder from the millstone and saffron, and apply light staples, and insert a spike where you need it;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very long bandage about a palm wide, then put two cloth strips over the staples, and cover with powder.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a thin stick about three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the top of the bandage is hidden.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the stick on the breach, and return the bandage to the neck, and loosen the healthy shoulder, and tighten the sick shoulder.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and take away from each part, and when you see that the time is right for the stick to hold the breach properly, and see clearly that the stick does not move over the broken bone, let it remain each day, and when the bandage loosens, if it needs to be tightened;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and have the sick one lie on his back, and put him down when he sleeps in a small position, to raise the shoulder;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the breach becomes stiffer by the alignment of the shoulder, or if you put the arm around the neck, and do not take it off unless there is a sudden accident, until 20 days have passed;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then begin to apply the plaster again if you see that it is necessary, and tighten and leave it like this until it has healed;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and she was restored in 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Now it comes that the shoulder is broken or out of place, and does not move only by touch;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	if the apparatus is arranged according to the figure of the fracture, and you reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then put on the powder of the mill with plenty of flour, and light touches, and put on a double sheet;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then put on a wide and thin steel, a little wider than the shoulder, and despatch the steel at all places of the shoulder, so to employ the linen stitches, so that the steel is even;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it with a strong bandage all around, so that the steel does not move from its place, and inspects it every day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and whenever he becomes loose again, if it is held in place, and makes the bone equal if it has moved from its place, and lies the patient on his back;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is reset after XX days or XXV days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when the number of days is completed, if it becomes loose again, and be careful, for it is not bone that moves easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	If there is a piece of the bone forward, and don't remove it, if it heats, and the bone, and do as we said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe abscess heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The arms are never broken in midair, but this happens sometimes.
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But they are often broken at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when they are broken in the middle, if they decline to the side, and the patient feels great pain, and there is a lack of support, and at times, and by chance he vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the reset should be such that the patient lies down on his back, and puts I cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders together, and gathers the ribs with your hands, and carefully makes it equal in all ways as much as you can, until the bone figure is like it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	and put on plasters and stoppings thereon the thin stone of salt, or other light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and return the thread roundly to the back, and fastens it tightly, and loosens it hour by hour, and if it relaxes, so that it is held fast;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to loosen it, because of rust or because of itching that comes to the joint, or pain or abscess, if you hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat him in a way that suits his cure;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove the plaster, and hold it tight until he is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the rupture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the broken ribs come from the back only a little way down, and at the top towards the inside, and do not bend much because they are thin;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the smell is good to the inquiry as are due.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restore them so that you make the rupture even, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on plaster, and a splint from a stick if you need one.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	If the ribs break and fall inward, the patient feels great pain and a sharp pain as if he were crying, because the bone rubs against the membrane.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and it is sore pinched and twisted, and it has great pains in the back, and this causes great harm to health, and the old have great trouble.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of these serve that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push the rupture away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We must not do this, for if hot poultices are not brought, they will not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, and the wound is healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And no one of us says that we put suction cups on top, to suck out liquid, and this seems reasonable to me.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, I have the doubt that the suction cup does not attract the excesses to the place for the arrangement of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should not cover the spot with another moist thing in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the wound even, then it is cured with the cure for ulcers, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because the bone rubs against the membrane, there is doubt about the patient, then it is good to split along the line of the ribs that are broken, and it is good to put a tool to prevent the wound from healing.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one should cut the bone, and draw it gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it is well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses develop, then put them on cloths soaked in oil, and put them on the wound;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal while waiting for the head of the abscess to come out, and wash it well on the coast where it is, until it is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the throat
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No times does a breaker come to break the neck bone, and poke so that he bleeds;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you do not know if he will be well or not, then take care that his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or stretch them out; and when you prick them with a pin, if he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if he does not feel them when they are pricked and does not move them, know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and the disease has been cured, if one puts on a cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you do not know whether it is well or not, if one's bones are softened, and one's accident is in one's hands, and on one's back windiness and excretion without will;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when one makes her lie on her back, there is involuntary expulsion.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it has been treated by being placed on its back and it cannot move, then it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If he does not work hard at his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident did not come to him, then this is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is such that if there is an abscess, you rub it with oil or sheep's fat, until it is calm;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then put on one of the plasters, drying it and binding it, and command the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain until he is well.\
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes loose, then cover it with oil;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and set the bone, then sew together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a sutură, until it is well;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone of the skull is broken, which is called "the skull-key", then you hold your pouch in your left hand and place it evenly with your right hand, then apply the plaster and tie it up, if you need to do so;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then tighten it, and if there is a dislocated bone, then mend it, and the bone, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the fracture of the leg bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	But if the bone of the thigh is broken, and if there were to be, then there would only be a little damage to the skull.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And put it long and flat in the bed, so that the pain and swelling come to the patient, and not elsewhere, and break what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration should be that you hold your hand over it, as long as you are above the broken part;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and knows what is the break and form of him;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is at the top, so make it equal to that break, as long as it is in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long, or it declines inward, then make the patient stand on his stomach as long as the rehabilitation of that fracture is arranged for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it equal, then place it on the plaster, and then place a beam of wood or a post on top of it, and stretch the break, so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and employ the use of splints on the sides, as long as the length is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if the abscess comes up, do not scratch it, as long as the abscess is calm, and then place on it what we have said before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as is right, if there is no bad accident;
et c’est li maniere.	This is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The auxillary joint is that which is between the collar and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	If one is that you take a strong pulse, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And let the two shoulders be tied together and raised up, and cut the patient on one side;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	Then let them put some arms above the patient, so that it comes to rest, and have a cart of wood then put on top of any heavy thing or the ministers extend downward;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then let the surgeon cut it evenly with his hands together, as long as the knife returns in the right way.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another way is that one should let the patient rest on his back, and tie his hands to his neck, then order two ministers that one of them tie who is lying on the side with his hands, and the others pull him by all his body, and extend each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too much, then tie the patient by all his body, and extend each minister to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the surgeon is near the top of the shoulder, then it is necessary that you put the strong pulse behind the shoulder, and the other towards the neck, away from the knife.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the surgeon is near the neck, then it is necessary to put the light pulse lightly, without effort, as long as the knife is even on both sides, and on the neck;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	and then make the break even, as it should be, and hold fast, if an abscess comes up.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if an abscess comes up, if one does not hold it back for seven days, and puts on a damp cloth and rose oil, until the abscess is relieved;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then hold it back, and the way to hold it back is that you put the plaster on the break, then join the arm to the aid, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and put the cloth on, and hold back on the aid, and on the arm so that the arm is in a good position, if nothing is causing it to move, or if the bone has not been broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use aids, and put on the break a bigger and stronger aid than the others, and have between each aid two spaces, and let each aid be so big that it goes over the break by three inches on each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then drag on the stakes, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste on the breach, stronger and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the stakes and the dragging, as we have said, in the ooze that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, let it be tied up for seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	Then watch for three days to see if the itch does not flare up again and does not come back to the member, or the painful sensation does not come back because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you dub the apotheosis, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if such an accident does not come, do not untie it before three or more days, and let the patient sleep on his back and keep his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a layer of clean, even wool on the shoulder, and watch every hour of the day or night to see if the shape of the broken member does not change, or if the bonds are not loosened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	If it is to be given by virtue of medicine, and give the meat that we have put before in such a way that the meat is at the first subtle.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to take effect, if it is thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be recovered in 40 days from all;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then you must remove and administer bath and medicines of ointments to the shoulder to heal it.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stiffness is bad and blocked, it should not be separated after one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of II bones, which are called "fosciles", one of which is small, and it is this which gives the hand its shape;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is this which is dislocated, towards the small one;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	maybe breaking only the big "foscile", or maybe both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small "foscile" is broken, the restoration is easy and the recovery is rapid;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large ones are broken, if the healing is ill, and more painful than when they are broken all together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If this small piece of wood has been broken by a slight blow, then it is necessary to extend it slightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if the large one is deformed, then it must be extracted with greater force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it on one cussin, and make the pouchet of the hand higher than the other two, and the smaller ones lower than the others, and let the patient lie across it, and the cussin in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no effort;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the ministers of his arms to the part that is wounded to his hand, or to the chains, and other ministers to the other above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then make it even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If the wood has broken into pieces, then place each piece in its proper place; and if one of them has become loose and does not fit, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it with iron and bone, as we have said above.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the breaking there is a wound, then I have spoken of this to the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses form, then bind them with a cloth made of rosin oil and white wax, so that they are neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and dip it gently from above, until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	and then coat the bone, and I put the ointment of the powder from the mill with a lot of wax, then put the splints on, and let the splint of the break be a little tighter, and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six splints or more in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	either that the break is in one bone, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold it up higher than the other part, and always further away, as I said at the beginning about the ointment;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the liniments that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, which is being held up, be linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And wait for the member and the lien after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some bad accident comes to the member, such as itch that comes to the member, it is right that you wet the member with hot water, until the itch is calm.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member not be too tight to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again to draw out, and if the lien is softened and the bone exposed, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it is necessary that the member not be moved again for a long time, because it is too stiff, then you must soften it slightly and leave it thus for some days, so that the movement begins again, and then draw it out.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, let it not be dislocated until XX days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	Or, with the head turned, then bind his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and turning over, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this breaker is healed in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	are few fractures on the back of the hand, and there comes but little rain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it is right that the patient cut it, and make it even straight in front of him;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the extended loom, and extend the broken bones, and make them even mirror-like, until they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and with the plaster and the staples, if abscesses do not come then I put a stake according to the quantity of the place;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in I wrap it in linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the spear is at the back between the navel of the plant, then I make a stake of drapels, and instruct the patient to strangle it to his bruised plant;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then the stake of a long drapel, and be the stake of curd also as great as the plant of the hand, and strangles it, so that it comes.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks on the outside, then it is fitting that you put a stake above, and another one in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and stop the blood flow between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the spear comes to any of us two, if it is poked, then he sets it even, so that it comes;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and strangles it with the plant, and you see if I put a straight small stake to lift the bruised one, and does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if it is broken in two, as in the index or one of the others, if it is made equal, and laid with its healthy partner which follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all together, that they may move freely, or you set one on a stake, as if it were a pestle;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and arrangement of an abscess, and protect him who comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken chest
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The flesh of the loins is often broken, and one can see well when it returns before and after.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration should be such that you tie them together above the break, and below too.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his link equally to his sides;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and that is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the breast, then one of the bonds extends beyond the knuckle, and the other bond below the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And so if it's close to the knee, then let the leg be removed from the knee, and let the knee be bent down.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	Then take the bone with its two hands so that it is according to its natural shape, and then put on the plaster and the bandage, so that it does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is an abscess, if he leaves it calm then return to your work and your treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The rest is done in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it in a strong cloth or a wooden board twice or three times, and hold back the excess, then bring the leg so that the heels come to the root of the ankle, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, away from the knee joint, and bring the end of the thread up;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn to the leg and to the thigh the bandage, then put on the splint bones, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then employ the fire cautery between the leg and the thigh of linen bandages in order to make even the stretching, then begin to bind in a three- or fourfold knot on the splint;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go up on the splint, and less the stretching;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then enter the two wires that you have threaded between the leg and the thigh, and in their place three splints, then return to the distention at the head of the wire, as long as you can remove the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it steady so that it does not move from its place, then let it be like that, and if it does not come back with an abscess or swelling or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, if it slips, and turns this way or that, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are any pieces of bone that grip, if necessary, let them be.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it cannot, if necessary, split the joint, and draw forcefully;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never break the chest in this case, if one sets a splint, as with the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	However, when restoring it in this way, do not let the patient move.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the collarbone is restored in a day or two or more, depending on the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	There is little breaking in the knee, but it swells many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, let there be only a split or a crack, and not all at once, and not too deep; and if it does not hurt, then let it be fixed in this way, so that it no longer hurts.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is done by setting equal what is long on one side and short on the other, until it is joined together, if possible, without moving;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then set the plaster, and put a round splint on it, if you need one, and hold it as necessary, then restore all the provisions that we have said for other breaks, such as hot and cold applications, and similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If each person has an accident like this, then he must remain healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	regarding the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	I understand that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken like this in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm which is even, and the work is all done; And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, then turn back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, then great pain is felt, and it can be seen clearly.
et torne desoz.	Then it straightens out.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then extend it, and make it even, and bind the joints evenly;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if the breaking is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension must be smaller and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and adjust accordingly to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	and when you have finished your work, if the person has hair that touches the leg on both sides and is long from the ankle to the knee,
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap two bends around the leg above and below, and place it in the middle, and at this length do not let the leg fall to the right or to the left, and so is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and no one should administer any oil along the length of the leg, and if necessary, and put the leg in such a way that it does not move, and properly do this to the fracture or wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or another accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the treatment until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break, but at the foot there is a break in two cases and only one time; it has happened to me in more than one condition.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a fracture of the foot and you see the bones coming together, put the sick person on the ground as if they wanted to walk, and then now put your foot on their own, where the bones are raised, and press them until they go back into their place;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And then put the plaster and press it on, and place a small table at the feet with II flat shoulders, and then fasten it to the ground in front of you, and then you have wrapped the drapes around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four are passed, then unclasp him, because you will find the bones even if they are broken or out of place.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there are any two broken, restore them, and as we have said to the two by hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put on the two broken a plate according to the length of the two, and let it be a little wider, then place at the feet the small table that I said, and fasten it to the ground in front of you;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three more broken, put on each a plate according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen drape, and fasten the small table at the feet;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be placed on top of the small table with the stomach of the foot so that it is well covered.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things I have said about other breakers, when we have said it.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and heal each injury so as it should be healed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone with a blunt knuckle
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the woman's bones are broken, if she is seated enlarged, then she leans to the back part, and is held by behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the hole of nature with cotton disease, and put also big as I sit;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then stand the woman up, and slowly bend her back and again jump the cotton, until it comes to the entry of nature, and the bones come back with slow sitting;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wants to urinate, if she jumps the cotton, and when she has urinated, it is put back, and thus do seven days or more;
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	so will be restored the break, and if you see, take a bladder of biber, and tie a cord to the navel, and pour all the bladder into nature;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	Then blow up the bladder until it is inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the break will heal itself;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it for a few days until he is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bones of the hand or foot of the man or woman are broken, if he sets it as we have said regarding the hip bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these wounds are not hidden from him who puts his mind to it and takes care of it, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the break signifies more than a few things in the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	let them eat then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the groin, when it is broken, take a neck of goose and pour the urine into the groin;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it in linen bandages, and leave it for three days or so, and he will be well without surgery.
de brisure avec plaie	with break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is appropriate for the one who has broken with a wound, even if it is great, as with the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healers that we have described testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals well, if the vitriol scar remains, then you should continue to restore the rupture in that very same hour, or else the blisters will come on that day.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the blisters come on, and you postpone the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm, and do not touch them either on the third or fourth day, for you will bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is protruding through the skin, it is necessary that you bring the bone to a standstill lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions have not appeared to you so that your hands are made equal, if it is with this instrument which is of iron, which has seven or eight inches long, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this it is necessary that he should put III or IVI, according to what is necessary in each treatment of fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member when opening it, and be sharp at the end, and thick in the middle ahead: thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	is called "planche", because it is necessary that the bent head be placed on the top of the prominent bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and be straightened once, as often as possible, and be equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle and the tool cannot take the bone well, it is necessary that you cope with the head of the bone as long as the instrument has the ability to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, to your power;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And look at this man who is delayed in the bone of the neck and small fractures.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If he remains in his place, then wet the cloth with wine-colored tar, and thoroughly smear it on him;
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put tar or anything else on the wound where there is oil, that he does not cause sores and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	And then apply poultices when you have reduced the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering around it well, according to the quantity of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not drawn up with the fracture;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have they done this foolish thing, and have brought upon the patient death or corrupting nothing;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And may be the dislocations are softer and more delicate than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it does not fit to put a splint on.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap in linen, instead of splints, hard drapes, and bind it fast.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days to have been infected the wound, if he is there that you put on top of all water, and I put poultices healing wounds, so as poultice tetrafarmacion and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are moved so that the wound runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day passes, and it cannot be joined but runs together again, knowing that there are small pieces of bone; because it is necessary that you wash the wound with water, and all these troublesome pieces that bring about pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, it is necessary that you cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken, and opened upon the limb, as the neck-bone or the shoulder-bone, and other great limbs, do not pull it out, for often death comes from this, but let it putrefy.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	in case it should break again after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound, if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	the bruses that come from the sudore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the health of the broken one, even when it is near a joint, and an ugly sight is the figure of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and for a chance cannot do their natural work of the limbs.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care then, so that we are not fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if the ministering of medicines is in a sticky state, as in aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocollus, acacia, and other things like that, so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine stuck with resin or with a lot of ash or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and put them on the neck in layers, and bind them well, and do not release them by hand every day;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocates it, and begins another one, until the nodulations are broken;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you strain on a well-made piece of cloth;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the cloth is that it breaks all the nodules off the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if his swelling is hardened as stone, he is fit for the oven, so that when cooked, it shows the excess flesh clearly.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Or you take him to no razor, as long as he is oiled, and cure him as long as he is well.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the break in the bone has healed, and the limbs remain weak and fragile, this may happen for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	for one is because it was tied too tight, and was not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or for one there are too many ligaments, and cannot bring the member into its natural position;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or for many armpits;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or for great movements, not in his hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or for one has little blood in his body, and are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is such that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the sin is multiplied in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and the minister give bath, and do joy and let sleep;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and dip it often in hot water, until the swelling runs to the member;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two injured limbs after surgery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural work:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	so do not believe the foolish who serve this one must break the member all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these works are to blame, and they bring great evils, and perhaps death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	all ways, let the nodules and the torture be fresh, so that they are raised from hot water, or that herbs are cooked that soften them, as foil of swan, and roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and the fabric made soft with a softening agent, as well done squirt, and you take the muskeg of swan, and confit it with fat or oil of lamb's ear, and make an ointment;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or you take figs, and grind them with hay of coles, and similar medicines that soften the sudden pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the osteum rubbed constantly and lengthily with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	So that each limb is moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the torture is old and hard, as stone, and it needs to be split with iron, then cover it up to the bone, with a sharp knife, lightly;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put on the poultice and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if delayed, if the veins swell, and perhaps if he is reset to his place at the site of injury.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	For by chance do not move him when he is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times cause pain and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when this happens, if the patient is made well, then leave him, until the abscess has been calmed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as the wound heals in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the potions for the dislocations of the shoulders just up to the height of the piez.
des mandibules	of the mandible
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It should be known that the mandibles are dislocated from both sides, and the dislocation of both is according to two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	either they are a little out of place, and slightly soft. Or
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	either they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the floor, and the saliva of his mouth so that he cannot hold it back, nor can he close his mouth, and envelops his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return by means of these four dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must bring it to the hospital quickly and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in this way that the ministers tie the head of the sick person, and pour mirres some pottage of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, there are two parts of dislocation;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands be away, to put even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And command to the sick person that he softens his jaws and moves them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the wound heal evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is brought back, most especially if they are both jaws together, then raise them with warm water and oil, until they are reset lightly;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not delay in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset even and the mouth of the sick person is closed well with a softener, then put upon it drapings wet with an oil made of rosin and wax, and let it rest lightly;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient lie on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the left or right, or try to turn over, but eat light food until the pains are gone and the jaw has recovered.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then after he has eaten lightly, and does not work to open his mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well healed and recovered.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be put back in place within an hour and do not return to their places, then fever and abnormal sweating will come, and by chance there will be a solution of the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, know that it is a sign of improvement;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often dies those to whom it is given, in nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not release from the coast within the extension of the thread inside it, and is dislocated only once at the back, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the recovery is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the dislocated joint with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put the splint and bandage on and hold it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the head that is over the neck cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it is not moved again, and if it is never dislocated, so he returns to his place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put a splint and bandage on it, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest as long as he is well;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in the same way you should reset the shoulder when it is out of place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder can only be dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	that one is when it is dislocated at the part of the shoulder joint;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the breastbone;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it is dislocated at the top part, and this happens sometimes;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and never dislocate behind for the shoulder, and never dislocate inside for the neck;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and many times dislocates toward the shoulder, more so at those who have little hair, for to them this salt shall be taken away without surgery.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough hair, they will get better without surgery, and return to being healthy.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps it happens to some men that they beat or break, and the shoulder is heated by a hot abscess, and they think that it has been dislocated.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	So then you must test it out, as long as you are certain of it.
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And this is how dislocations happen when they go down toward the shoulder, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find various manifest differences.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and at the head of the shoulder there is a pit, and dislocate the shoulder on the table where the head of the shoulder is, just like it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move at all;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and if it is dislocated from above, then is it not hidden, for you see it clearly in the towel.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not to be used when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the way is that the minister should lift the hand of the sick person upward, then put the splint on the joint, and raise it up by force.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister should lift the hand, and extend it upward, then put it on.
si venra hastanment.	then come to the hospital.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if not as we have said above with hand movements, then it is convenient for the sick person to be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and provide a softening and soothing treatment, as an infusion of althaea and fenugreek and melilote in water, and be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then let the patient lie on their back, and place the shoulder's axil on a stool of another equal, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrour of the foot on the stool, and gently lift up the shoulder with care, and pull the hand of the sick.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and others ministers dryve the head of the sick man, so that he does not move down;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	the shoulder comes back right away, and you will see if it comes back in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and that you make be present a man who is greater than the sick one;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be two sides of the chest, and set the axil of the sick man, and lift up the axil upwards so that the sick man hangs by his arms;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and others ministers pull the hand of the sick man down towards his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then with him put something heavy, so that the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And they also answer in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is placed a long rod in the ground, so that the shoulder is also caused as if by a pistol, and it is not too large nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then let the patient be placed, but that there are drapels of sweat on it, and the patient is standing on the long wood;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then his hand is extended from one side to the other, forming a loop, and the joint will return to its place peacefully;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not return for all these things that we have said, then this remedy is done:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take a long wood of two arms of great length and four fingers wide, which has the head placed so that it can enter perfectly into the shoulder joint, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then place it on the wood with the drapels of sweat, so that the wood does not hurt the patient, and then put it into the shoulder joint of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend your arms above the wood of a long stick, and place the shoulder on the wood, and the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm on an escutcheon of a shield of width, and let the hands be extended downward, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint is now ready.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Then when it is in place, in whatever way it may be, you must put an even woolen needle, then set the plaster ready with powder from the mill, with incense and amber, on the whole shoulder and innards, then draw it away forward, and tie it to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let your hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he suck a little, so that the members are comfortable, because he will heal more quickly;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then suck a little more after 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is stiff and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture that has come or due to some other cause, you must apply cauterization three times, as it is done with the paste of cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it relaxes after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise your arms upstream, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or extended or softened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joints never fit back in their place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	When dislocation is due to a fall or push, and stretching of the hands, and another place is administered;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes to the limb greasiness, and slowly moving, then the patient often bathes, until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the head
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joints of the neck are dislocated and return to their place.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation cannot be restored, for we can see it and feel it clearly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with good health, if you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it in such a way that the bones come together as they should, for if the bones do not come together, there would be great pain in resetting them.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and may not be reset from all sides, especially at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	Si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li Mors.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	This is worse than other dislocations, and it causes greater pain, and sometimes death. And if it can be done, so that it can be brought back, you should hold its hand with both of yours;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and its arms spread out, and the hands with their thumbs in line with the neck at the back and at the front, and push the joint into place together with the palm roots, until it recovers its position;
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocations are in front, so that when it doubles its hand to its other hand, and raises its wrist, it returns to its place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	If it does not return to its position, give it a strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and two minister extend the arm, and two turn it, so that it does not move at the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm of each side, then you have wrapped a long and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he touches the joint to his hand, if it does not come from any oil to soften the joint, then draw the joint together so that it regains its shape.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, if put on plaster dry with ash of owl, and strain it together, and bend the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then loose it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the joint is firm in its place, if loosen the ligature, and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not fit well, if start again the plaster and the ligature, and leave it for a few days, until it is firmly in place;
puis le deslie.	then loose it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if he feels pain after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, if bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	put on top of the joint a piece of thick lamb skin, then leave it for a day and a night, then the bone, and make it enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the skin back on, and then bring it into the bath again;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then do this two or three times until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see pus, put on top of the wound a warm, butter-soaked cloth, and squeeze it out;
si revenra a sa disposition.	then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The dislocated joint of the hand returns more easily than the joints of the other members do.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it is necessary to put it back in place as soon as possible while it is still dislocated, so that the bones do not swell or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And let them stretch out the hand of the disease on a table, and extend the fingers, and make it even, so that it put its palm on the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it recovers.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Anyway, you must look to see if it is in the right place.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the diseased back of the hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's hand flat on the table and bring it to rest: then look to see if it is well in place;
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the extraction of painful abscesses causes them to break open, and he leaves it like that without recapping.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will be twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and do not ask the patient to do anything but let his hands remain moist until they can extract anything completely.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then you know that the nerve is cut, or an artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other remedy than to extract by cautery the case, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put on the poultice that we have said, then extract it and leave it for V days, then take it off and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, if the wet warm water, and rub until he is cured.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Never are dislocated the joints of the hand to each side, never at the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then hold the two together and draw them back into place as much as possible, then support the head of the bone with your hand, and move it towards the joint where it is dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it there for a day, then make it even again that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not move it if you have done so, and dislodge it from day to day, and make it move, and then relace it in place;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so often, until it is loose, and in the same way if it is dislocated at the base of the hand, and do so as you have done above, until it is well;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do this, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the spine of the neck
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there will be no cure, for it quickly kills the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the excretions come forth without will, cannot be held, and often soften any member, or both legs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the spine moves to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which mutates in the rear is called "gilbositez".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the cure is that you treat it if the gilibosite has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or recovery from all of it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of curing with great words do not bring any great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have simplified it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilibosite that comes from the back before the chest, there is neither beginning nor cure;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and I say that what comes straight in two sides, and cannot be cured except properly what comes at the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	is that the patient is lying down with his face flat and has no pressure on him so he does not get hurt;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put a piece of wood under his head forming an arch, and another one at the feet, and tie with a cord the legs of the patient behind him, and another one at the ankles, and at the knees;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and the two ministers know the cords, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two beams;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they are well closed, the beam as we have said, and the mirrour sets its palms on the spine forming, until it comes back;
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not come back by this cure, then take a round table of three arms long, and tilt it away from the wall, and let the patient be on one side, and pour the water of the table away from the wall, and then put the middle of the table on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place its legs on top of the other head of the table, and press firmly, until it regains its position.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if you see, do so with the palm that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And that you place two torches at the head of the patient with one arm, and between them, and a palm's width apart, longwise;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each torch a hole, or the torche runneth, and let the torches be firmly set in the ground, so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each pair of torches have a single torch, so that the line turns, and have two small torches, a palm's width longwise, to turn the line;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then lie the line that is among the torches towards the palm of the hand at the head, and the other line towards the legs at the other torch, and each servant turns its torch along the whole line, and the master sets the line evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on desiccating plaster with much chalk, and then the poultices, and then the tablet of III feet long, which, as we have said, must be red to the place of gloom and the part of the spine sound, and bind with a thread, so that the patient uses subtle fasting until he is well;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	And if there is no improvement at the end of this time, then administer softening and soothing medicines with the tablet we have described above;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never give a piece of lead, and never does the appearance come in the lower spine at the back, and be careful that it is dislocations;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	is the bone that opens, for one must not have any presumptions:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	may bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Here is the translation of the text:
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Saiches that as the joints of the hip and as the joints of the shoulder come only from dislocations alone, not coming at all as with the other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parties:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	behind and in front;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and behind them there is a little more, and in front and behind them.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of his dislocations inside is that when one joins the leg with the sick, it is longer and more open than the healthy, and the patient's knees cannot double their knees at all.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the time which is necessary for the wound to heal after an abscess has been cut, so that the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes at death, if this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of who has it in front, are that he has his leg well according to the fulfillment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	all ways, do not double the knee joint pain, and if you make it run, it can not before, and holds back his urine, and swell the ankle, and when he goes, so he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it comes behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in its place between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The patients who have this kind of dislocation should be cared for if the dislocation is old and it takes time to heal according to its condition, otherwise there is no cure;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it is not necessary that he has presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those who have a fresh dislocation, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must hurry to restore the joint, and put it back in place and move it to the right and left, and twist it from side to side;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	So that it does not come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back in this way, you must have a strong assistant, and hold the leg very firmly with two hands, or tie it to the knee with a piece of cloth;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and others extend their hand above in such a way that they pour water on their palms, and then tie it with a string from the knuckle;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and others tie the head of the limb;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend forwards and backwards all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground all at once, and remains stationary.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common in four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then one should treat its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocations are in the parry, then one should raise the patient on his side, then tie the string to the root of the elbow, and the limb that is out of place, then extend the string upwards towards the elbow, and downwards towards the forceps;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	and others extend their arms, and embrace the large ring of the elbow that is ill, and extend it away from the body form;
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	If they return to their place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot fix it in this way as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope from the sole of one foot to the sole of the other, and from the thigh of the leg that is extended to that of the other, and keep the patient's legs extended more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then hang them by the neck from a beam, and have one arm outstretched on the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	and command one minister to embrace the head of the shoulder, and have other ministers hanging with the patient who embraces the shoulder so that the dislocation returns to its place quite quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation has gone out, so lie the patient down, as we have said in the case of one with gibbus, and remove the rope from the leg that is wrong properly, and also from the stone;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then take two tongs, one at the head and another at the base, then insert a tong between the toes at the patient's foot and pull it towards the shape;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and place wet towels inside, so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and have him put his hand in a position to reset the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a table, and press him as we have said in gibbosity, and make the patient lie on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocations are forward, so it is necessary to extend the injured leg far away, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place him on his back on the injured side, then press with the other hand, and extend it towards the groin;
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocations are on the side, it is not necessary to extend the injured person below, nor to raise them onto the ground, rather they should be laid out on their sides as we have said for sleeping on the two hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it lie on its face, and extend the leg as we have said before, and you must all press upon the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be fixed when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then set the bones, and put on the plaster, and extract it from a bandage so that the shin does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put on the plaster;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, extract it as before, and leave it for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then remove it, and let him go blithely, until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The dislocated limb is to be reset according to three methods:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inside and outside, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not delay.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	and do not lag behind. If the leg does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the rehabilitation of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee with your palms, and pull apart your toes, then bend the two sides of the knee in turn;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other ministers extend his foot until the genitals return to their place, and the sign is that he bends his leg at the knee easily;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make the leg bend at the knee, and keep them together firmly for three or four days, then release it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work on the sick to move until the members are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, then give a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated and never fully displaced, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	They should be brought if they are light, and must be extended lightly to their hands when they are first touched.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the top, you must make the patient sit up straight and support him with his ministers away from the leg, above the ankle joint;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then teach the foot to you at your right hand, and then at your left twice, and then extend it upwards, and blow strongly on the foot upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, blowing and teaching the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, it is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, if the effort begins again, because it returns;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return like this, then make the sick person sit on his back on the ground, and put something firmly in the ground between his buttocks, and tie the sheets around it so that it does not hurt the sick person.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then place the minister's thigh, and another minister extends the leg to its hands or ties it, so that he lies on the collar of the stone;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister evenly, and the rope is close between the sick person's buttocks to hold the sick person in place when they are extended;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the minister' even on the dislocation at his hands, and another minister ties the healthy leg to the side, and the dislocation will come back slowly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is done, then put the plaster on and press it down, and strain it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	and leave it for 2 or 3 days, and if he holds on to it, let him stretch it.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then let it rest for three days or four, and don't go out for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will still be dislocated.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come to the foot, so that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so it is best to gently extend them without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the joints of the back or foot, then you must make the patient sit with his back or leg straight up on a bed or bench, and put your foot on what opens up those joints, and press down on your foot gently, until he regains feeling;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is even, and he does not move anything, then set the heel of his foot on a table at two joints, then stretch it gently, and leave it for three days, then let him rest;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with a dislocation and it is restored, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be bold:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things calming aposteme with hot, and leave the patient in God's hands, unless you see hope of health:
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if you set the member back in place now, so that the hot apses come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, if you administer calming apses, and cure the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and with dislocation there is fracture, and small bones are dislocated, if the bone, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and keep away from a place of fear, according to what I have said, because it will cost you your soul according to your creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body.
