O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its expositions and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of the hand, namely, "surgery."
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of the hand is neglected in our region and considered foreign everywhere, the knowledge and skills have perished, and nothing remains except for brief descriptions found in books by the ancients that were handled by the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and intentions are hidden and knowledge is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	I think it is necessary to vivify this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has been neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes this must surpass in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and tendons, and the number of veins, and their movement and rest, and their places of origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because Hypocrites says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above, be careful that he does not slip into error and harm people; just as I have seen many of those who meddle in this science and then abandon it without knowledge or experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who lanced an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he lanced the arteries in the neck; as a result, so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in a man's testicle, and the stone was large; he took out part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.Et vis un autre qui copa une veine sur la tete d’un home qui aveit grant mal de caboche, et li veines fu si lances que li sangs s’en fu tout par; et le home fu mort en  .iiij. jors.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they cut it out he would certainly die.Et vis un autre home qui aveit grant mal de caboche, et fu traitz la piere; et li sangs fu tant par la veine que li home morrut al instanz.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treated by a duke of our land, who had broken his leg, and with the break, had a wound; and the ignorant doctors pressed the break on the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave any dressing on the wound, and left it with only a bandage; and they instructed him not to remove it. And he remained like that, with his leg, foot, and toe all swollen, until they were lost.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to attend to him, and I hurried to go and release the leg; and when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, and I could not heal it; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire leg was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another patient who had a wound that became infected, and then inflamed due to the maltreatment of his lord.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	Because when a ulcer is free from melancholy humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place that one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, dear son, it is necessary that you know that manual work is divided into two parts: that is, there are actions where there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	So it is necessary that you be careful, so that the foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Then take up your weapons in confidence, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind the terrible diseases of grief, and have faith in yourselves so that you may come from this world into the other one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galiens says in some of his warnings: "Do not take on yourself the care of a serious illness unless you are called upon by a foolish master."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is on fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and it covers the head to the feet. It also includes information on the instruments of cauteries, their preparation, and all that is necessary for the procedure.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is on cutting and piercing, leeches, wounds, arrow extractions, and similar procedures. It also includes information on the instruments used in these procedures.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and扭伤s, and similar things; and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we remember the work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the most lengthy speech and subtle knowledge and the secret responses; and the majority of the wise spoke about this, and agreed upon it; and I am satisfied with their words, for I desire brevity.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery aids universally in every complexion where there is matter, whether it be the .ij. complexions: namely, the hot complexion without matter, and the dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	Those of hot and dry complexions together with matter, some people said that cautery is of great aid; and others said the contrary: that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat nor dryness; and those who said the contrary, that cautery helps greatly in hot and dry diseases that arise in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the complex nature of fire, you find the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	Because I have found this to be true through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And yet, do not worry about this except for those who have experienced it and know through long usage the treatment with cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and their recoveries and the timing; we have no fear of the other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the myrrh was similar and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery combines heat and is of greater goodness than burning cautery of medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	Because fire is simple and does not harm any part other than the cooked member, and does no harm to any other part if one does not touch it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines pass from one member to another, and cause the sickness of a grievous cure in the member; and by chance they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire does not hurt because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and been under the truth of things; and because of this I excuse myself from the length of speech, for it does not please me to take away from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it heals illnesses of the body, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed upon what time cauteries should be performed, and chose an auspicious moment.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the harmfulness that arises from it is lessened by the aid of cautery; and especially if the cautery is for necessary, severe pain that cannot wait until a more convenient time.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish people do; for there is no recurrence of the disease that is healed by cautery; and they say it is so, but it is not true, for cauteries are not like medicine that moves the complexion, and dries up the humors that cause pain, and is better than medicine for its swiftness and power, and for the virtue of its work and majesty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease may come again according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its power; and there are gathered in it the excesses caused by the digestion of foods and similar things, unless cautery is administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with tooth cauteries for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but that rarely happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine; but it is true: they do not believe that cautery works after medicine has failed, but their intentions are false, and cautery is the last resort of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with a golden instrument is milder than with iron, and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that cautery does not cause swelling, but this is not true, as I have experienced and found in some people; and cautery with gold is more effective than with iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	However, when you heat the golden instrument, you cannot tell when it is hot by its color, and it cools down immediately; and if it is heated too much, it is heated in the fire; and so there are many disadvantages.Et quant tu chaufes estrument de fer si le conais par la color et si durent adont plus longuement, et s’il n’est pas trop chaud il ne fait mie porriture.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have arranged this chapter from head to foot, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive-oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and there are two types caused by a disease called "soda", and by many humors which flow from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for numerous ailments such as dreaming, toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases arising from coldness, like paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a cleansing, dissolving medicine for 3 or 4 days, depending on what the strength, age, and condition of the patient can endure; and then have the head of the patient shaved.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then have him sit cross-legged in your lap, and place his hands on his thighs; after that, place the palm of your hand between the roots of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two middle fingers meet, there will be bleeding, then heat up the cautery which is called 'olive-stone', and this is how it is formed:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and move your hand up and down while pressing gently; then lift your hand gently and check the bone again to see if it is broken; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you do as I have instructed; then take a little salt and put it in awe and soft cotton, and apply it to the spot, and let it stay for 3 days; then apply moistened cotton in butter; and leave it until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with the ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients say that when a wound stays open longer, it purges more; and for this reason, they advise using leeches.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then what has been burned in the bone is healed over, and then it is cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should hold the cautery above and press so hard that one lowers the bone as much as a thumb width, as the women put their thimbles in their fingers to let the humors issue out; then the wound must be left open for a long time; after that it must be cured and bound.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem good to me in every way, except in some people where there is fear; and I think that I should leave it, for the shoulder is weakened by continued solutions of nature, as we testify in other members; and likewise when the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more safe and mild for me, so I work together salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain affects the whole head and lasts a long time, one should use herbs and pills that are called 'cochie', as well as purges for the head, oils, and plasters; and if they undergo the cautery we mentioned earlier and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is not of a cold nature and is not too cold; then cauterize it with the fire cautery we mentioned earlier for just a little while.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	Afterward, cauterize each horn of the head up to the bone as we said before, and do one cautery in the area called 'vasselz'; there is a place for placing leeches; and lighten your hand so that you do not reach the bone: the patient feels much more pain from this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later; and the cauteries on the horns should be thinner than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and here is the method:
dou cautere dou chief	of the cautery for the head:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain arises in the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is purged with purifying medicines, and all other remedies I have described under the division of diseases have been applied without success: then cauterize according to two methods, that is, with hot water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of hot water: take a clove of garlic and remove the outer skin; then crush it into two pieces, and apply it to the affected area where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic underneath the skin; and when it is placed, bind it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then loosen it and draw it away from the garlic clove, leaving the wound open for two or three days. Then apply a bandage soaked in butter until healing occurs.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the wound has healed, if you see any growths, use one of the burning remedies I have described in the twelfth chapter on burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery is performed as follows. Heat the cautery tool until it is hot enough that its shape is changed:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "cauterization" because the top is made in the form of a lid where there is .i. little curve, and in the middle has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn it slightly so that half of the thickness of the heart is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not glow, which is hot, and abundant blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the wound, and placing it for 3 days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this vein with the cautery called "cultellare", on all its points, and be careful not to cover the artery in this vein which is not old.
de emigraine	of vein
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure veins as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine and fire do not help him, then you should heat the cautery called  "cultellare" until it is white; and sign the painful area with a line of about half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and stretch it so that you do not cover the artery and so that spasm does not come to illness, and be careful of the mandible so that it does not move when one chews, and let the nerves have no regard for the mute and that spasms do not come to illness, and be careful of bleeding from the artery when it is covered, as covering has great fear and especially for those who are unaware and inexperienced; and leave the wound in mid-way; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is covered, and I will show you where it opens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him all over the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on the extraction of an artery, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that one and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of ear pain due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is ear pain from cold, and one has applied dissolving medicines and other remedies that we have described in the division, and the pain does not go away, then heat this cautery, which is called a "point", of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After point around the entire ear of the affected side, or around both if the pain is in both ears, and then move slightly up from the root of the ear after you have marked the area to be treated; and have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth's torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	There is no cautery for the ulcers that come from flowing blood, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and do not apply cautery to appearances that come from dryness and nerve-spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this appearance of torture that comes from blood flowing from the head and purging, and from gargling, if it does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one in the root of the ear, and another a little beyond the temple, and the third in the junction of the two lips; and apply the cautery to the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery in the shape of a key, burning it halfway down the ear, and another cautery in the temple as long as a thumb; and leave the cautery on until half of the head is burned.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the shape of the key is as we have described before, but it should be a little more slender, and the knife a little thicker; then treat the area as I have described before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, yet does not benefit, and the patient has fever, then make 4 cauteries: 2 on the 2 horns of the head, 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 on the place which is called 'vassels', as we said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient large pilules that cleanse the brain; then shave the head of the patient all over, and put on the occlusion of mustard which is written in the treatise on occlusions; and here is how to do the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if he is not, make him 3 cauteries in the middle of the head going down to the neck, with a space of 2 fingers between each cautery; and cure him as the others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient can bear it, make 1 cautery in the middle; and if need be, 2 more on the 2 horns, and cure him as before. And let it be the cautery which is called 'olive', as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of coldness from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and of that which we have previously mentioned; after washing the head of the patient, then make cauterization within the head and upon each temple, and one behind and three upon the spine of the neck; and if you have greater need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then make four cauterizations upon the spine of the back; and let it be until the heart's most heat is burned, and lift your hand; after cure it until it is healed, and let the cautery be that which is called "olive oil" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and first the brain must be cleansed of hairs and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear it, make him gargle and chew, purifying the brain often with good meat; after that, the king the head in the middle, and do to him .a cautery according to what we have said before, and .a cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the disease is strong and painful, make cauteries as I have said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be of olive according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is in children, make a subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When through the cause of melancholy there are corrupt humours and thick phlegm, then cauterize with mild cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.Et se li malaides est en la teste, se li fai cauteres de bille de verre selonc la maniere que j’ai dit; et s’il ne peut endurer le cautere de feu, se li fai cautere froid com nos avons dit a celui qui ait mal en la teste.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are inclined to melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink which will purify the brain, according to what is said before in the division.And if through the cause of melancholy the humours are declining into melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give him something to drink which will purify the brain, according to what is said before in the division.Et s’il est li cors dou malaide sec, adonques li fai boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mondifiez et li corps aussi, selonc ce qu’il est dit a celui qui ait mal en la teste.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After releasing the head of the ill person, make a well-made linen bandage in the shape of a circle and place it around the head; have the patient cross their arms and hold them tightly from all sides; then apply the liniment, using mutton fat from an old sheep; gently heat it to a temperature that the patient can bear; then remove the bandage from inside the head and let it cool; do this for the ill person once a week until they are healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make many small pricks all over with the cautery tool. This cautery method moistens the brain greatly; then place wet cotton in mutton fat and honey on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of their eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe first comes to the eyes through the signs that I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient drinking things that cleanse the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat in a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands the patient to turn his head and cauterize the scalp, and make 2 cauteries on both temples if both sides are affected, or one if only one side is; and cut all the veins and arteries under the heart, and make the cauteries long according to the width of the temple; and be wary of bloodletting, and if you see too much blood emerging, stop it with as much power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and the incision, the cauterization method; and sometimes cauteries or incisions are made under the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	where tears fall
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When tears are old and habitual, and are on the veins or arteries that are visible on the outside of the head; and one sees that this is from cold phlegmatic superfluities, then he should be cauterized as I have said earlier regarding the temples: 1 cautery in the scalp, 2 cauteries on both temples, and 2 cauteries or incisions under the two bones; and if more is needed, then cauterize bleeding above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	where the body weeps within them
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat him according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights of leeches; after that, bleed the head, and make him a cautery with olive oil in the middle of the cautery; and make two cauteries with the cautery called "clavilis" on the two sores, one just under the hair; and be careful of the artery so that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the eye is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery called "olivare." This is how you make it:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see fit to do so, make two cauteries on the two warts as long as the warts are; and don't take your hand away until a third of the paper has burned, according to the manner I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes are turned backwards and prick the eye; and cauteries are made according to two methods: one is with fire, and the other is with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in a warm bath; then draw on paper over their eyes a figure that is like a myrtle leaf, with the beginning of the sign in between the hairs; then moisten cotton with egg white and parsley juice over the eye, then heat the cautery so that it takes the shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure you have drawn a little bit many times, so that the heat is burned in the place; and the sign of the health of the eye is that you see the paper retire, and the hairs rise at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus. For three days, then moisten cotton with butter until the scald is healed; after cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs grow, and the paper softens, then restart the cautery in the same place, just as you did before; and if the hair is lost, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural place, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of a myrtle leaf; then take French soap and live charcoal, of each one part, and grind them together well; and do this quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the shape that you have made like the myrtle leaf, and put it under the eyes; and if the disease is in one eye only, then work in one, and if in both, then also; and moisten cotton with egg white under the eye; and let the patient's hand be in warm water, and press a little and release repeatedly whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, because it burns just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine with your right hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the bite is passed, lift up the part, and examine if you see the papery skin raised as it was by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, all is well. If not, then apply more medicine to the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equalized, and your eyes are focused; then put on wet cotton in tallow until the burn scar is healed, afterwards cure the place of ointment which is called 'diaphenis' and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not get in the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair grows in the eye, then restart the medicine on the place which is soft from the paper properly, just as you did before; afterwards cure it until it is healthy; and this is the form of the myrrh fuel:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints should be; and do not rely on the right way for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas with cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatments are not helping, then you should use cautery according to the following method:
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold his head steady between your hands so that he does not move or lower his head. Then moisten cotton with egg white or parsley juice and apply it to the fistula. Next, heat the cautery, which should be shaped like a tent, with one point at each end, although a flat cautery is also suitable for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press on the fistula if it is open and clean it out, drying it thoroughly. If it is closed, open it and draw out any pus. Next, apply the hot cautery directly to the wound, holding your hand on the cautery near the area beneath the eye, taking care not to cause any damage. Apply the cautery to the fat around the eye and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of cauterization to the bone, it would be good. If not, then restart the cauterization again once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; after that, place moist cotton on it, and treat it with a drying ointment until it heals; and if 40 days pass without healing, then apply corrosive medicine to uncover the bone; and the king according to what he would do in his chamber.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterization for a fistula that some of the ancients said. Examine the fistula, and pierce the site; after that, insert into the slit a slender camahan, from which there is a form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the amount of a 3-day-old clump; and hold your hand on the camahan firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the molten lead does not leak into his eye; and one must place moist cotton in the patient's eye, soaked in olive oil or in awe: the lead will fill the fistula, and heal miraculously.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization that we have described, that is good. If not, then one must administer a poultice to the nail, and bring the fistula back to the body of the nail according to what is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in the lips that are called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have described in the sections above, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it gently into the cracks until it reaches the bottom; after that, dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms in the root of the throat, or uvula, or palate, or tooth roots, and it causes swelling and pus, and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said for fistulas, and it does not heal: then you must use a cautery according to the size of the fistula; after cleansing the opening of the fistula, hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and from behind; and do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed like this, that is good; and if not, then you must expose the area and remove the rotten bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it doesn't work, then put the head of the patient in your lap; after heat the cautery which will be described below in such a way that you place a candle on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside until the patient feels the heat going to the root of the tooth; after lifting your hand, reheat the cautery according to your desire; after fill the patient's mouth with warm salt water, and let it sit for an hour and spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, a tooth that was loose is made firm, and the gums are softened and restrained, and corrupted moisture is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of dental pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When dental pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or whiteness, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterization in two ways is needed: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter: take butter from cow's milk and the tip in an iron or brass spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, moisten it in the butter, and hold it on the painful tooth until it cools down; do this repeatedly until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the cotton and butter becoming cold, heat the iron again so that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cautery with fire is such that you take an iron or bronze rod and make it as thick as the fire will not reach the mouth of the patient; then heat the cautery, which will form the shape that follows, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools; do this several times, for the pain will be removed that very day or the next. And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter before the cautery, and then rinse it out afterwards; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of any tooth you want, according to what you can afford; and this is the shape of the rod:
des scrophules	from scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When scrofula is due to cold moisture and is not responsive to digestion through medicine, then heat the cautery so that the shape that follows comes next, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from one end of the cautery to the other; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, use a cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days. Then treat the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When moisture overwhelms the channels of the stomach and particularly when it comes from a cold complexion, the patient should first be purged with solutive medicines; then make cautery at the root of the throat, being careful not to go all the way to the throat and not to burn the heart but just a little. Then make another cautery at the junction of the neck and the head of the spine, using the cautery called 'clavicle' of which we have spoken earlier; and dress the wound as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the tongue
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the stomach are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is chronic, then make two cauteries on the sternum in open wounds; and another cautery between the breasts, halfway between the nipples; using the cautery called 'clavicle' as described earlier.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see fit, make cautery by pricking with the cautery called 'points', of which the form is given earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or as needed. After that, dress the wound as described before, and let there be three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason cauteries are more effective when you do them three times.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterward, soak the patient's back and side in warm water; then gently press the liver which is inside the breastbone with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, apply the cautery which has two fingers of lead in this place where there are .ij. nerves:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart until it penetrates to the chest, and the figure of the cautery will come together with four cauteries; and this is why a cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the shape of the cautery which has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, so that there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put crushed herbs on the cautery; then let the patient rest and not move the limb for a long time until he is well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, whatever happens, afterwards make a cautery on the thickness of the cautery claw, or with many cauteries in points. For the joint is closed and moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	from the cautery of phlegm
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should do cauteries of phlegm with roots of aristolochia, and in such a way: take a long root of aristolochia, as large and as long as your fingers; moisten it in oil, and heat it on fire, and cauterize with 1 cautery between the throat and the collarbone, and 2 small cauteries a little lower down on the part which is under the beard; and 2 cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind; and 1 cautery in the groin, and 1 other over the stomach, and 1 between the 2 shoulders, and 2 at the 2 sides of the groin opposite to the cautery which is between the 2 shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it gently as if applying a perfume.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And some ancients said that some people use a cautery like a razor, heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and if there is pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver, then it will burst, and a fistula will come which cannot be healed. But in this work there is fear, and now people die, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	And the most common are from the stomach and the ribs as we have said, and it is necessary that the patient lies in bed, because the rising of the cauteries is great in this work; and if he cannot stay in bed, let him be seated on a chair of straw, or a wooden chair, or a throne, and let the cauteries be lifted from where he was seated.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three ways to cauterize which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of these, one way is to make three or four cauteries, following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the cautery of the liver which we mentioned earlier; and do not press your hand on the entire cautery, and let the patient be careful on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another way to cauterize is to heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the cartilage where the mouse's bite is towards the left, and the elevation at which you lift the cartilage according to the shape of the body, and the cautery according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, insert the two prongs until they pierce through to the other side, and then pull away the cautery, and thus you will have four of them. And if you see fit, cauterize with all three prongs. After the treatment when pus has been discharged for a long time, it is worth as much as any of the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery does not help a dropsy patient, except in the manner that is called "asclytes." When you treat them according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment is not helpful, then you should make .iiij cauteries around the armpit, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one on the groin; and the cautery should be near the base of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterward, leave the cautery open to drain pus for a long time, and do not stop treating the patient after the cautery; healing will hasten, and the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be a spear, as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is shown there.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in a person with dropsy, and they are filled with yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not go too deep, so as to avoid the yellow water, and the cautery should be in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After that, make 2 cauteries on each leg, one below the knee in front and the other above, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauteries for a long time without cleaning, until the water comes out; then clean it as with the other cures we have described.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When a stomachache comes from cold and moisture, so that the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much strength, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken of before regarding the cautery of the stomach, and also a circumferential cautery; and four cauteries around the abdomen with a fine cautery-iron, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make cauteries on the elbow, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries upon the stomach apart from the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good support.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are in the rectum, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely under the armpit poked little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery under the abdomen. two fingers;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think his stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell, then on the face put .i. large cautery on the stomach, as it is before said, and .i. another on the liver, and i. another on the mouse at all cautery clave; and let the cautery remain open long time. After cure the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, use a cautery that looks like  .i razor, and then put it all ablaze on the cut thelul; and hold your hand so that the cauteries reach the base of the vein, from which the blood flows; do this once or .ij., and if there is a lot of thelul, cauterize each one as we have said. After curing with healing ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alchatim, it will provide more relief.
de plaie mal curee	of poorly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot undergo surgery or opening, which we will discuss in its place, then there comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula appears and is suppurating and exuding pus and corrupted moisture, you should test it with a thin probe, and be careful to know how deep the fistula is. Then heat the cautery like a razor and insert it into the fistula according to how far the probe went in; repeat the cautery until the flesh is burned, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of corruption; but be careful not to burn the nerves or large vessels. If the fistula goes toward the bladder or intestines, be careful at those places and do not apply the cautery near them unless it is necessary; and think that they are not sensitive. After curing the area until it is healed, if the opening is small, you can know that it is completely healed; but if the matter does not come out, understand that the opening is blocked, and the bone at the bottom is corrupted; and thus as one of those we will discuss in their places.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When cold pain comes to the kidneys, and there are strong winds, and it does not take effect on a woman, then you should use cautery on both sides of the kidneys with the hot-iron cautery that we mentioned earlier. And if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will provide greater relief.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, and the patient retains urine, then he should be cauterized in the area above the bladder, where the hairs of the pubic hair begin, one on the right and one on the left, and each cautery should be as long as a fingernail; and he should be cauterized one or two times on the back if necessary; and the cauteries should be curved according to the previously described shape.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and does not conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: therefore, one should make three cauteries around the udder, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries on the back; and the cauteries should be curved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistors descend to the socket of the hip joint and displace it due to this cause, the sign is that the affected leg appears longer when measured alongside the other; and one finds the site of the displacement soft, so you must cauterize the disease upon the socket of the hip with a .i. cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the socket as it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle; and the cautery should be like those used for cauterizing the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not available to you, make .iij large cauteries from the olive-oil lamp, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others; and dress it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, it is from cold and moisture, and the disease is cured by what we have said in the division and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the disease of gross humors with stinking pills, or other good-smelling pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	Afterward he should be cauterized; and the way of cautery is according to two ways: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip joint 3 triangular cauteries according to this form, and he makes a good depth and large, and there is between each cautery of space the thickness of a thumb, and the cauteries are olive-shaped; sometimes a cautery is made in the middle over the head of the hip, so that there are 4 according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, he is cauterized with the cautery of the circle which we have previously said about the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the thickness of the heart is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the way that one does in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it comes to the thigh and leg, he makes 3 cauteries where the disease says that the pain holds him, and 1 cautery above the ankle joint .4 fingers, on the left side a little; and the cauteries are cuticular, and the thickness of the heart is burned; and if the disease feels that the pain extends to two or near there, he is cauterized where he feels the pain .3 or .4 points with the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if he feels the pain below the knee towards the thigh, have him cauterized with a blade or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you don't leave the cautery on so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you don't cause the patient greater harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have been cauterized on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and it was pierced and corrupted all through the foot. After that, he died from a bellyache.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, cauterize one and then the other, according to this method. // And they told me about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the method: make a piece of iron as big as a little finger at the tip, or a little less, and have it split into wedges, with the space between them the thickness of a finger nail; and let the wedges be an inch apart, and also shaped like nuts, and have a good handle. And here is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing, then apply it to the hip joint of the patient, and turn it onto the healthy side; and cauterize once with one cautery rod and leave it for three days; then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cautery sparingly because of its fearsome reputation, and few people dare to use it; yet it is one of the best cauteries for those who can endure it, wherever it is applied.
de la dolor dou dos	of back pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When back pain comes from sitting or impact or from excessive evacuation, or from similar appearances of cold matter, in none of these appearances is cautery worthwhile except for that which comes from the diffusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate that after the patient is relieved of foul-smelling pills or other similar remedies, one should apply a line on their back, where the pain is located, three times marked with incense, and in each line .v. cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cautery should be performed according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you wish, perform .iij. cauteries or .iiij. using the middle-sized cautery tool according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this illness comes to young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight and painful neck when they wake up, and fear; and you will find it in the last spine of the back, and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it being cured, then cauterize it with a cautery needle according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the cautery turns purple on each part of the spine evenly. And if you see it, then cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery needle .ij. or .iij. lines apart, and let the points be close to one another. After that, cure the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware of administering cautery in a place where there is swelling that is on top of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in joints is due to moistors that are expanded throughout each member of the body, and when the pain comes from the feet, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured by medicines, then it is cured by cautery in such a way: make the mouth of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if there is need for you to prick on the face of the foot, if you make cautery all around the "point". And if pains come up to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make cautery over each knee with 3 or 4 cauteries on each part, all olive oil cauteries; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand against it longer than until the thickness of the skin is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we discussed in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, then prick around the wrist 2 lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then prick over each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines. For if you give him good care and cleanse the blood, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the root of the syphilis
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When gangrene comes in the feet and the bowels descend into the groin and this is new, then when you see it being cured, he should not eat that day. He should use things that loosen the belly so that the feces exit his belly; after that make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his breath until the bowels are relaxed, and bring them back to your fingers, and sign with ink under the gangrene on the bone of the wrist, and all over a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat up the cautery of which this is the shape:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and oozing pus. Then bring the bowels back to their place; and the minister holds his hand so that they do not return; and treat the thighs well for the patient, and put under him 1 cushion and 1 servant under the thighs, and another one under the foot who makes him hold his hands; then put the cautery on the sign with your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, do it again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the bowels do not exit when you do the cautery; so that you do not burn him, and so that through this the patient does not die or get worse.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And the cautery for children should be subtle according to the size of an ear, and for large people as large as their ears; after 3 days cure the area around the cautery with butter until the burn is healed; then cure it with other ointments until he is healthy, and make him lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well sewn together; and his bandages should be tied for a long time so that the bowels do not exit when he tries to walk around.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after forty days, when he wishes to get up, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, work little, and guard against too great fullness of drink and food, and excessive loud speaking; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed. And I shall now say something about the treatment of cutting into his shoulder.
de la routure dou ventre	of diarrhoea
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When diarrhoea comes from other bellies and is known, and you see that it is not growing any more, if the patient has a large belly, do one cautery of the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said. Some of the ancients say that it must be cauterized with the 3-angled cautery according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first mark the armpit and draw a line over the breadth above the diarrhoea, and another across, and hold your hand in between throughout the entire cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to a limb from falling or injury, and the pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then cauterization is required with a cautery called "point", and the cautery should be adjusted according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virulence, location, twisting, and pain. If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; if not, do another cautery on top of the previous one, for such a custom exists that it should change in the member nearest to which it is, so you must do cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	from mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The head is sometimes cauterized with great care, and especially the diseases that come from putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it cauterized, take care if the disease is in its early stages, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not stop or persist, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the disease, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 at the back of the neck, and another towards the front at the end of the hairline; and 2 on the temples, and one behind on the nape; and let your hand remain so that the cautery reaches the bone, and as much as the scalp comes out so that the vapors of the gross humours can come out; and cauterize it on the wound according to what it is in front.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the wound is everywhere scattered; and it is bleeding obviously, then you must cauterize it with these cauteries that we have said in the head, and .1. cautery in the nose, and .2. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .6. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .1. large one on the groin and .1. other nearby, and .2. on the .2. shoulders; and .2. on the armpits, and .2. on the tendons of the feet, and .1. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the creases of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, so that you do not burn them; and sometimes make .1. cautery on the bone of the wrist, and .1. other on the bone of the stomach, and .1. other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And you should know that the more cautery you do, the more it helps, and moves to help; and you should know that the sick person does not feel pain from cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted. And the cauteries should be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the irons. After that, treat the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to a limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then one should apply cauteries on the limb according to its size; the cautery should be slightly warm and inserted into the thickness of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed. Sometimes cauteries are applied to the hand, foot, or back, at the site where the nerve exits that controls the limb, and in this way, the swelling is removed. However, no one should attempt this if they do not understand the anatomy of the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	of alder
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" appears, and medicine does not help, then cauterize it with a warm cautery according to the thickness of the skin, so that the whiteness is removed and its color changes; then treat it with a poultice made of equal parts of bran, lentils, rosemary oil, plantain leaves, colon blood, and almond blood; mix everything together and apply it, covered with a cloth, until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer comes at the beginning, and you see it stopping, then cauterize it with a cautery that looks like a circle all around the edge of the cancer. And yet the wise men say that one must also make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; and yet I don't think this is good, because I fear it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen sometimes; and a more straightforward thing is to cauterize it all around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called  "adubelati", and it is slow to die, either due to the excess fluid it produces or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, very old) and have little blood, or due to the time of year; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize it all around with many small cauteries by pricking; after that, leave it as it is. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing all the way through, then heat the cautery of which it is made:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that illness which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the skin, and let the cautery be such that the sick person feels it driven out in such a way that the course of the pustule is relieved. After the cure, let it heal perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another kind of illness is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a corrosion or eating away of a limb, for it eats away at the limbs just as fire burns dry wood. If you see this illness in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries, both small and large, according to what is appropriate for the location of the illness; then cauterize all over until you reach down to the corruption, and none of it remains, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply a poultice made with oil onto the cauterized areas until the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption is removed. After the cure, use ointments to generate flesh. And if you see after three days that flesh is healing, that is good; and if not, then restart the cautery over what remains of the corrupted areas. And this corrosion can sometimes be cured with medicine rather than fire cautery; but nonetheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already described the cure for medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that a disease called 'clos' according to our understanding arises in the feet due to cold, and it is a large, malformed growth that blisters the foot. The cautery for this disease can be performed in two ways: with fire or hot water. With fire cautery, you heat up an iron rod as big as a feather quill, made of good steel with thin edges, until it is red-hot, and then apply it all around the nail, turning your hand around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail; leave it like this for three days until pus starts to form. Then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows and sea salt, and leave it on overnight. The nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots. After that, clean the area with ointment until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they appear on the body and many times in the hands and feet, you should treat them with hot water cautery as follows: take a brass or iron rod, or an iron quill, and place it on the nail and the surrounding area, especially on warts; then place the rod so that it wraps around the nail, and pour a little hot water on it, holding your hand steady and pressing your hand as you turn the rod so that its edge reaches the base of the nail, allowing the hot water to penetrate deeply to the root. Let the patient endure the pain of the hot water for an hour, then leave it be, and it will be uprooted at all its roots. Do this one after another until you extract all those on the body, then clean them with ointments that promote healing.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from coldness of the nerves, or from quartan fever or other [ailments], you should make four cauteries or six on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery on the penis, and one on the stomach with the olive-oil cautery. It will stop the trembling and hasten the healing from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of stinking pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes they appear as boil-like sores on the body, or as stinking pustules, which come from thick corrupted matter. When they first appear, one should make cauteries on each head of the pustule: a fine cautery made of myrtle wood, the tip of which is heated in the fire, or of long aristolochia root, or with the lenticular cautery. Sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning as mentioned, and they cannot grow from thereforth, but the surplus matter from which they came is broken, and they are healed; but this should be done after blood-letting.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great bleeding from the artery which is cut at the wound that comes to light, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cauterization of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very grievous thing to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet when this happens to someone, you must hurry to place your index finger over the wound of the vein, and press it very hard until the blood is quiet beneath your finger, and no drop comes out; then take several olive-wood cauteries, both large and small according to the wound and the location where the artery is cut, and place the cautery on that vein where you are holding your finger, and hold the cautery there until the bleeding is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds again when you lift your finger from the wound, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease doing this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped; and be careful not to hurt the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be well stanched itself when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods we have described: by cauterization, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong ligature, or by medicines placed on it that have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and pressed firmly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies a tight bandage or places something hot on top, or uses similar remedies, will not find much relief if any.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine available, he should put his finger on the wound as we have said, and apply pressure until it is stopped up; and he should not remove it but keep it moist with very cold water until the blood is congealed, swollen, and stopped up; and he should then seek a physician for cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all the diseases that require cauterization with fire or burning remedies, and the properties, causes, instruments, and forms of cauteries; and I included that chapter from the head to the feet, and now I will continue this one on the same topic so that it is easier to find what you are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so that I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterization, and because of this, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to be foolish. Because there are many types of people who come for treatment. Some are so attached to their illness that they would rather die than give it up, and because of the greatness of their folly, one must fear for them.Et il doit avoir paor de tels qui vienent si adroizement et si prest qu’il ne demourent por l’espousseture ne por la medicine que il demourerent por lor malice; et de ces doit on avoir grant paor, car il n’ont remede.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And one must fear those who come so quickly and eagerly that they do not stay for the leechcraft or the medicine, but only for their folly; and of these one must have great fear, for they have no remedy. And there are those who give you their sense and say, "Wait, I am healed"; yet the disease is stubborn. One must not consent to those who come to you with such an attitude, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open yourself foolishly but wisely to those from whom you can take and receive; and use prognostic and indication in treating your illnesses, for health is turned toward salvation. And this will help you achieve a good reputation, glory, and praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, may our Lord give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter for you in discussion according to chapters, just as it is before the chapter on cautery, which I discussed for you from the head to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Do you know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when the childbirth is too strong, it squeezes the baby's head; and sometimes it comes from a relaxed cause that one does not know about.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and in all those I have seen, death soon followed; therefore it seems to me that it would be better to leave the treatment in several stages.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head swelled every day until it could no longer support it; and it had such an abundance of moisture that it died, and this moisture is collected under the bone above the neck, between the brain and the bone; and if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, then you should split a large opening in the middle of the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and see the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the cavity is deeper and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you see the creases of the head opening on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand from within, and it does not close again; then you should split the head into three incisions in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all moisture forcefully. After that, press out the openings with linen and powder, and apply wine and oil, leaving it thus until the fifth day; then loosen it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be extracted equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat, reducing the moisture as much as possible until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you observe where the abscess opens, and the collection of pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut therefore where the abscess opens and the pus collects, and cut according to what you are able; and be careful not to cut the artery, for if blood flows and there is an evacuation of moisture, the patient may die from blood loss.
de reume	from gout
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone that they have a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or the feet, and the disease is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with which one will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them cut, the patient should face away; then rub the area around the eyes with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck with a 1-finger grip; then look where the vein bleeds, and the places are after the ears, and they are very close to each other; then sign the places with a cross, then cut both with an sharp spatulum two parts deep so that the vein bleeds up to the bone, and this should be done from the front of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the spatulum under the artery and cut it from above, cutting as deep as two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood will flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	If the artery does not open to the touch, you must measure the quantity of the space of three digits, then cut down and incise to the bone; and that which it is appropriate to put blood outside is six parts, and by chance a little more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains anything on the bone, so that pus does not come from it, then drain the wound and ligate it, and treat it with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emetic
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old-age diarrhea comes and the catarrh is acute, due to moistures from tears and heat in the temples and ancient delirium and similar things, and it is treated by various methods of medicine and all that does not help him, then we must draw out the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hair of his temples, and feels the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens easily by its pulse and is little repose outside when in some men who are too cold; and if it is reposed, he pulls his neck from some cloth, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and washes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatulum of which there is the shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	then scorch the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with tweezers, and cut it well away from the tissues beneath in each part; and if the artery is thin, return it to the tip of the nail, then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two bones. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow freely throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw off the blood from 1/4 to 3/8 of an inch; and if the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk so that pus does not come out before the wound heals, and the blood flows gently; then cut away the excess between the two ties in the same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a hot-iron cautery until the bones are cut through; and this is the best treatment if the patient does not have fever and is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For cautery helps to dry up moisture, so it is most helpful for moist wounds.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the place with old cotton and places it under well-made tent; and when they are taken off, they are treated with dry medicines that cause pus to form, and with tents until it is healed; and if without cutting the artery as far as you work, hasten to cover it by cautery, or employ vitriol and stretch your hand so that the blood is stained; and if you do not have this present, put a bandage on the place so that the blood congeals, and wet the place with cold water so that the blood stops, and stretch it as it should be; and what is best and most gentle in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery knife of 2 parts, but the blade must be well-spaced to retain its heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	Because when the instrument is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a finger's width of space, and then when you have marked both places, you place the hot iron on until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be spaced apart because they are not soldered by this cautery throughout; and that is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are descending from the veins that are on the top of the head, and medicine does not help, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and in his forehead there is pulsation like trembling; and if their eyes are sunken and moist so that the eyelashes have fallen off, and the eyelids are swollen and burned by the tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And the ancients called it "cured contused", and you should do to the patient who has this disease that he has hairs on his forehead, then make three incisions on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the incisions is as two fingers in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other two are two fingers above the eyebrows, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on both sides above the eyebrows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound is the size of three fingers across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	And have a piece of sponge and a mouthful of rags ready to wipe away the blood, then fill the spatula with two parts of this mixture, from which the form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is to be on the temple up to the second incision; and scorch all of the skin between the two incisions up to the sinus that is on top of the bone, then remove this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put into the first incision the instrument that is called "cultellar", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is smooth and not at all sharp, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the incision towards the armpit to the heart, and the lower incision towards the bone, and bind it tightly until it reaches the middle incision. And clamp all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes until the incision is continuous to the heart, and then make another incision in the middle opening to the other side; then draw out the blood equally, and express the site of the wound for the taken blood; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and place moistened cloths in wine and oil and garlic, and guard against hot abscesses forming there; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and administer a large amount of cool water, then treat the wound with basilicon ointment and oil of roses, and other treatments for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When one has an acute cataract that usually occurs, and you see the eyes thin and small, and weakened vision, and burnt eyelids; and the hair falls out, and in the head there is pain, and the patient sneezes; then from these signs you know that those matters and this cataract come from many veins, and the cure for it is to let it be, as it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you must command the patient to look up, then make a large slit in the middle of the forehead, and another from the left temple to the right, cutting down to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that control chewing; when the bone is exposed, wipe away all the blood with a sponge, and then pack the two lips of the slit with old cotton, and apply tenting with linen; then bind wet cloths soaked in wine and oil over it, and beware of hot abscesses; once it is removed, you must rub the bone until pus starts to flow, then treat it with things that dry up pus, causing the wound to heal.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of flower of wheat and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment from it; and administer it to these wounds to dry up pus throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	from the treatment of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: either grains or a stone or ore; or something flowing, like water and garlic and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear, whether a pebble or some other object that does not adhere to the ear nor grow in it, then hold the ear towards the sun. If you see the pebble, apply some drops of violet oil or oil of sweet basil, then bring about extraction; and make him sneeze with a smell, and plug his nostrils when sneezing comes on, and bind pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear uppermost. Very often it comes out through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then bring about extraction with fine pincers, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, then bring about extraction with a fine needle of small wire; and if it does not come out in this way, then make a hook of bronze and insert the end of the hook into the hole of the ear firmly, and stop up what is around the hook with soft wax so that the air cannot enter with the hook; then pull it out forcefully, for very often it comes out as we have said. And if it does not come out in this manner, then take some glue from which birds are caught, and put into it some instrument that is appropriate for doing this, and place some cotton around it; then press the glue onto the pebble or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so that the abscess and inflammation will come out, and the spasm; and the manner of the splitting is such that you first make the patient lean his head back, and draw blood according to the measure of its strength, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small split in the root of the ear at the fatty part from which it depends; and let the split be like a moon, so that you come to the pebble, then extract it according to your ability, and suck it strongly with your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain which is inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a thin spatula according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And administer an incision to that grain. But do not do this when you think the grains are moist from the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract it with thin pincers and a sucking instrument, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the case of water that seeps into the ear, the patient should use a sneezing remedy made from ingredients prepared first, and pack the ear with soft cotton. And let him lie on his side with the affected ear facing down. If the water comes out through the ear, all the better. If not, take many small stones according to the size of your finger, heat them in fire until they are warm, and place one end of the stone into the ear, and strike it with another stone from above, and continue striking the stone in the ear with other stones until all the water comes out, as we have said regarding the stone. And if you see that, take a stalk, insert one end into the ear, and heat the other end in fire until the most delicate stalk is burnt; then do the same with other stalks until all the water comes out, as we have said regarding the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an insect, if it is a small body, like a flea or similar, treat it as we have said in the division section. But if it is a large body that can be felt, administer extraction with pincers; and this is the easiest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section on distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should examine the ear in the sun; if there are any worms, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take a cockerel's comb, from which is taken the dye:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow underneath and wide at the top. And insert the thinnest end into the ear according to the amount of pain from the ailment; then suck firmly on the cockerel' comb; do this frequently until all the worms come out. And if they do not come out, stop up the ear with cotton as I said about the stone; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in the extraction of worms, and you will find them in the section on distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear through this instrument, from which is taken the dye:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is made of silver or brass with a narrow end and a wider top for distillation; and to press the distillation into the ear use an instrument of well-crafted brass, and if you wish, take a razor and wrap cotton around the blade; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you wish, into the cockerel's comb, and let the comb be in the ear; then insert the razor with all the cotton inside, and press your hand gently so that the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and the patient will feel it inside, and the distillation should be slightly warm as one heats it over the fire; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not then be so effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the cleaning of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without an eardrum; and the same thing happens to men through the cleaning of a wound, or from pus forming within the ear, and sometimes this cleaning reaches deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there is only a little discharge, which can be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, when it occurs deep within the ear and cannot be seen, it is a matter of painful healing in various conditions, and in this case, one should put the affected ear towards the sun; and look inside: if you see the membrane appearing, then it is working as it should.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be sharp and smooth both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear; if the membrane is due to pus or the body of the ear, then grab it with thin pins and gently scrape it, until all the pus is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the infection is deep in the ear, take a small, thin razor and heat it slightly in the fire, then apply it to the body of the ear. If you feel the infection which the patient feels great pain in hearing, pierce gently, and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert into the ear a tent according to the size of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is closed, then take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriated copper on top; and if you see the ear swollen, then it is fitting to pull out the tent and insert another tent moistened with cerotum made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding that are used for distilling remedies.
de la char des papieres	of the charcoal of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This poultice comes in papers from the herbs when they are moist and dry, so you should spread them with tongs and tweezers, and the top of a spatula from its roots; then put ground vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without the outer skin, then cauterize with a lens subtlety, and the cautery after the incision is worth moving; and many times they return, as long as nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times they come in papers from herbs that look like hail in its shape and hardness, and this is why the disease is called "hail", and it is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper above and below; the works are as follows: take care if the hail mutates from one side to another, and that is a light thing to know; then they cut it with a pair of scissors, then the skin of each part lightly, then pick it up with tweezers, and peel it. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper a little, it will not hurt the patient; and if the split is large, then assemble it with a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not force it, for the ointment will restore it immediately and prevent infection.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hematoma is descending into the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and hold it with tweezers, and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by the incision, that is not a problem; and when the hematoma is pressed, wash the eye with salted water, and cure the place of what exudes pus until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is woven into the paper, and this happens most to children with no adults, and it is very painful for them, and they get the catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at sunlight because their tears flow to their eyes. And because of this, they sleep on their stomachs, and their papers are under their eyelids, moistened by the inflammation and appearance that covers the eye. And when you press it with your fingers and feel the exinach coming out between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts his head on the lap of the healthy person; and then take .i. linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that exinach contains in each part, and then put it over him; and press with your fingers from both sides, so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of the moistened spatumile, not any larger than the wound made in vein opening; and cut into the skin deeply enough so that you reach the exinach; and in various dispositions, exinach comes out of the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove the bandage completely from one side between your fingers, and move your hand back and forth so that it is loose; and be careful not to push into the wound, otherwise you will reach all the way to the eye and cause bleeding.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the wound opens at the beginning of the slit, gently open it slightly so that it appears; then remove it as we have said, then wet bandages in vinegar and water, place them on the area, and tie with a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are those who bruise and put something on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then heal the wound until it is healed. And if a hot abscess comes to the area, then treat it with soothing poultices until it is healed.Et si li maux sont sus le col ou sus la gueule, si fai boires le bestes de vin et de breu, et si tu mets sus le leu oile d’apricot et poudres.
des poilz des papieres	And if the pain is in the neck or mouth, then have the animal drink wine and brew, and apply apricot oil and powder to the area.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow from papers unlike nature, and are enveillit, they harm themselves and bring on various diseases such as laments and the softening of papers and albugine, until it leads to their destruction; and there are four ways to treat this: by cautery with fire, or by medicine water according to what is before the cautery chapter, and it is done either by incision and sewing or by splints, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the affected area in your dominant hand, then hold the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that's good, but if not, insert a needle with thread through it; and this should be done near the edge of the paper where the hairs are growing, and weave one thread throughout the entire paper, and then return it to the razing tool; next, make an incision in the area under the paper, under the abnormal hairs, all the way to the spatumile, cutting through the large and small larmier; then remove the thread and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, and sign a figure of enche on the paper, like a fuelle of mirte, and the shape should be according to the amount you see the paper rising.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if one needs to cut out a large amount of paper according to how soft the paper is, then make an incision all the way to the spatumile along the two lines you signed, starting from the large larmier to the small; and let one of the incisions be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a hair, then insert the needle into one of the angles of the wound, and then peel it all off; then bring the two lips together with a sewing needle and fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and dry up any excess thread on the two eyebrows with any sticky substance you want to use; and if not, don't worry about it, then leave the sewing and threads in for three or four days; then treat the wound without sewing, using dry and compressing substances, because the paper will rise as soon as the wound heals and comes together, but sewing is painful (as the ancients say), and this is a job without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure which is as the myrtle leaf, as we have described, with .iij. inches unfurled according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut out what is on top with small scissors evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers and the object is not equal, take a needle and thread it through the figure; then take another thread and thread it through the larger ear lobe, and the second thread through the smaller one, and gather the threads between your fingers evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift off all the skin you have marked as we have described, then close the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerot
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And sometimes the paper hairs are reversed; so you must use what we have said about the incision, but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the bones is as follows: you must turn over the parchment and put it inside according to what I have said, and then make two bones by art, and two thin ligatures as long as the parchment and the width of the spine; and cut two heads into two parts where you hold the threads; then assemble them both subtly above what is on top of the parchment of the eye, and strain the two bones out of their two formed parts; and leave it like this for some days, and the skin that was strained will die and harden and fall off as it drops by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, then treat it until it heals; and when the wound is sutured and the parchment lifted, the hairs will no longer hurt; and this is the form of the two bones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The procedures are such that you pierce a fine needle and thread in with a thin, soft silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie them together subtly, and let the length of the threads be about a palm long; then arrange another thin silk thread in the case, and tie the end of the thread; then put the patient's head in your hand; and have it exposed to sunlight so that the procedures are declared, for this is a subtle and fine procedure, then pierce the needle through the parchment directly onto the hair, drawing it up through the parchment until it reaches the case, and thread that hair into the case, whether there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out straight through the case with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you will treat the hunt from below to the very thread that you ordered for it, until the hunt comes out through the hole above and you see it with your eye; then you will pull the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for 1 or 2 days, until the hair grows back in its place and the flesh grows over it; and if the hair is short, accompany one long hair from the horse's tail, and let it grow with that one, until it is elongated and then you release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the pustule of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease called "alacrati" or pustules occurs in the eye, there are two ways it can happen: one natural way and one unnatural way. It can come on suddenly from a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to treat it if it is natural is that you split the wound and separate the eyelids, and put in there tendrils of flax, and let it lie until it is healed; and you must not use in its treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do, the disease will become worse than before; but you should use soft things, such as fenugreek; and rosewater or altered and sprouted flaxseed are cooked, and daisy-flower ointments melted in one of the eyes, and wrap a tent around it, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the goal of your treatment is that you take care not to let it heal according to its previous form; and these works that we have described are remedies for this disease so that it does not return to its previous form.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the pus that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease, which is truly called "axacrati", is a natural and accidental condition. The accident comes from a wound, a split, cauterization, and similar things; and the way to treat it is to take a needle, thread it with a double thread, and insert it into the pus, piercing from one tear duct to the other, so that the threads come out at both corners of the eye; then the pus comes to the surface all around the needle, and the swollen area becomes about the size of a broad bean.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a razor and insert it into the split, turn the paper over, and make two splits along the edges within the paper; and let the edges of the two splits be at the two angles of the incision you have made, forming angles so that when they are brought together, the shape is like that of the letter "J" in the Greek alphabet; then remove the pus according to the quantity that has collected beneath, from what follows the paper, then bring the two severed parts together and sew them with a thread of wool; then treat it with the medicines we have mentioned for softening and tenting, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or stitch or cautery, then you should make a clean split under the hairs of the scalp, and according to what is mentioned above; then unsheathe between the two lips of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the operation according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise master prepares remedies with all his power so that he makes the figure return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs in terms of treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And suddenly from the scalp
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this soudure occurs in a similar manner to that of the scalp, with the paper above being separated from the white of the eye, and unable to move or perform its natural functions, then you must therefore pierce the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and press it with tweezers until you grab what is open in the sphynctered subtile, which is neither too sharp nor too trench-like, so that the patient cannot bear the pain of the sphyncter being too sharp and bleeding the eye; and make your incision to peel off this union lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and when all of this assembly is healed, they sometimes have watery eyes with a saline solution, and the eye is raised with soft wool; then put a tent made of linen between the paper and the eye, and place moistened wool on top of the eye; and after the third day, use the collyrium and soothing remedies until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that there are two types of nail: one is nervy and resembles a hard wart; the other is not nervy but resembles white congealed moisture, which, when touched with iron and pinched as though to break it, cannot be broken by anyone. Both types originate near the inner corner of the eye and grow little by little until they cover the entire eyelid and obscure all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient should place his head in your lap, then open his eyes; hold the piece of paper in your hand, then grip the nail with small forceps and lift it up; next, take a needle, thread a horsehair, or cow's hair, or bull's hair through it, and double over the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, then tie the nail with a thread and lift it up, and scrape along the side of the nail where the eyelid follows the tear duct down to the lash line, then cut the remaining portion at the root of the tear duct, carefully and with small forces, until you reach the delicate sphincter; leave the natural tissue of the tear duct alone so that no incision comes near it. Sometimes only the nail at the inner corner needs to be lifted and tied as described above; then scrape all around the sphincter, for this is where the form lies:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful not to touch and break the fleshy membrane, or pierce the eyelid; after the incision, drop a little crushed vitriol into the eye, and place a collar of litarge around the eye, leaving it on until the next day; then treat the eye as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	If the nail is not sensitive and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the hook cannot enter, this nail-like appearance is often cured by medicine; and it grows back as I have described in the section on division. And if you see it covered, then treat the eye of the patient, and take the spatulum, a small and sharp tool, according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently, and if you see that it does not thin out and the cuticle recedes, then drop a collar made of litarge and red copper and ground seal from your mouth into the eye; then stop up the eye until the next day. Then the next day, repeat the other procedure according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, as with a hot abscess, then milk it, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid causes great harm in the eye, then pierce it with an awl and scoop out a portion but not all of it, so that the body of tears does not enter; then drop into the eye a red collar made from litarge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows over the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	In some men, red flesh sometimes grows over the pupil, covering it and pressing against the eyelids, turning them inside out, resembling a rosebud; and the treatment is to have the patient press his head against a healthy person, then open his eyes, and cut away all that flesh with suitable instruments, holding it firmly; then cut away the first piece of flesh, and keep cutting until the end, being careful not to hurt the eye during the operation; and make the incision over the pupil as we described in the incision of the fingernail, and remove the pus with gentle pressure, as this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is complete and all the flesh removed, then apply eye salve or you may distill red copperas and similar corrosive medicines, and place a pad of egg white over the eye to protect it from hot abscesses; and if anything remains, and the pus is hot, and you suspect a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with cooling remedies; then return to your treatment until it is healed, and likewise do for as many layers of flesh as are affected in this way.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, you should adapt the treatment to each weak eye according to its natural condition; and for accidental conditions, use an iron instrument in your treatment; and do not insert your finger into any of these treatments until you see that this member can bear that treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of them
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Veins are the red ones that are covered under the eye, and they affect the sight and weaken it all day. So, first of all, you must examine the eye to see if anything is wrong with it other than the sebaceous cyst; then, have the patient lean his head back and gently compress those veins at their base according to your judgement, and let the base be pressed firmly in a double fold according to this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two folds by degrees in one body according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then press those veins gently, and draw out the blood drop by drop after each other, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and be careful not to pierce the eye with the tips of the spatulae, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very skillful in your work so that you do not touch anything but the veins; and when you have done this, distil into the eye green and red collyrium to corrupt what remains of the cyst.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all that in that hour, then make a poultice of things soothing the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and there is a warm abscess, then begin again according to this method that is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the eye fistula
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Examine the 'arissati' fistula closely: when you heal it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a hole in it where you must cut into the abscess, removing all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption and blackness, then there is the cause of this malady; it is called  'aspre chief'  and should be treated by making an incision from one side to the other, puncturing like a file as shown in the present figure.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it over the site of the corrupt bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little while you know that the corruption is gone; and do this several times, then restore the site with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	if the site is sewn up and the wound heals, and the body of the bow is sewn up, and remains so for forty days, and it does not open again and no evil happens, then you know that it is healed; if not, there is nothing else to do but to open the fistula at its opening with a needle according to this form: then uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with sharp medicines, and when it is uncovered take a 3-pronged iron, and thin out the shaft up to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone in front of the wound, and move your hand away from the eye a little, then push down the entire iron so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through their vein if they hold their hand over their needle; then restore the site with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the skin grows and hardens, cut the matter at the needle; this is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open fully all around and there is no disturbance to the brain or thinning, then you should ligature the patient; then treat the eye, then place cups or suckers without piercing to draw out, then apply a poultice over the eye made of acacia and aloe and incense and myrrh, and then bind the eye tightly with bandages and clothes; and the manner of the clothes is that you take quite soft clothes, double each in four, and then place one upon another according to the quantity that the eye needs; then tighten it from above with a hard bandage, and repeat the cups to draw out without piercing; then remove the cups and leave the eye tightened day and night, and if the ligature softens, you should tighten it greatly; then remove the ligature after a day and a night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not, then restart the poultice and the clothes and the ligature and the cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the bursting of a web
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven web, then it opens and comes out of the papers like a grain of resin, and is terrible to see; therefore, if you see it covered, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part underneath up to the part above, then push another needle where there is a double thread in the part of the eye; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the web around, and tighten it well, then remove the needle and put a soft lamb's wool on top; and let it be until the threads break with the membrane, then cure the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the web in each part by a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes cause much distress, pierce them with a sharp spatule that comes from the bottom of the eye, and dry the white moisture and lower the eyes, and enter in at once; then pull until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati", occurs only in the bowels of the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the appearance of its treatment is that you have the patient sit upright and straight, then hold his head with both hands, and move him so that you can see the bowel coming to your eyes; then let it be fixed there, and do not lower and cover the light, and let the patient see things as he used to. And if it doesn't descend underneath, know that it is water, and if the bowels don't appear as we have said, hold the patient between your hands, then take the sharp spatule and press on the surface of the cornea with it gently until the bowel emerges; and when it is issued, distill into the eye warm water mixed with honey, or water or fenugreek that has been boiled with honey, then let it be cured with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearance of the disease in its division, and what should be done to pierce it; then act according to health. You should make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light so that the sun does not reach him, and close and press his healthy eye very tightly; then place the piece of paper over his eye, on your left hand if his eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right; then take in your right hand, if his eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if his eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument next to the corona through the thickness of a hair in that part of the eyeball where the lesser tear duct is, then gently insert the instrument called "almagda" and turn your hand so that it pierces the eyeball, and feel that almagda reaches the empty space; and the measure of the way of almagda should be at the bottom of the measurement of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the iris; and this is the corona of the eye; then you will see the bone in that paper through the clarity of the horny tissue, and then place the instrument where the disease is, then express it under one way after another. If the disease comes out now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little rest, and if the disease rises up the second way, push it down with the instrument, and when it is fixed in there and does not rise, gently withdraw almagda by turning your hand a little bit; then put in the eye a little bit of seal gem, and remove from that eye. Then place over the eye, after washing it, cotton or wool moistened in rose oil, and bind it with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on comfrey with plenty of egg yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, because there are some people whose eyes are too hard, then you should take the instrument called  "alberit", of which this is the shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make a slender incision, then inject alum, as we have said; and when the work is completed, prepare for the patient a dark room where he can sleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and take light foods, and do not move his head or to the right or to the left, and let him be bound according to his condition for three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then re-bind him until the seventh day; and you must not do this during the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but you should lighten it so that the water rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	if hot abscesses come, that you loosen the eye before the seventh day, and use that which soothes abscesses; and when it is appeased, loosen the sight and put on his face an eyepatch to cover one eye, and let him remain in that dark house. And then go out of the house a little at a time, and return to his case; and know that no disciple should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Persia, who told us that in his country they pierce with alum, causing water to flow out, but I have never seen anyone doing this in our land, nor have I read of it in any books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them; and they should be made of brass properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the tips of these pliers should be of the same subtlety, and the handles in .iij. angles bent.
de la char sor le neis	of the jaw above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	At times, various types of warts grow on the nose, and some appear like scorpions with many feet; and sometimes there are those with a dark color, and others with a light color. For those warts that are light-colored and not dark, you should make the patient sit facing the sun; open their nostrils, and cut off the wart at its root with a very thin pair of forceps, as far as you can reach, until you know that the entire wart is removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if anything remains which one cannot cover, then open it with one of the subtle instruments lightly so that nothing remains; and if without swelling, or an abscess occurs, then lances it as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, then hasten to cauterize them until the pus is stanched and all the corruption is removed, then pour in wine or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the ears are affected and moisture extends to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is corruption in the bone above, and the instruments do not reach to cut it out: therefore you must insert a piece of linen thread, about a finger thick, into the nose and let it hang from the nostril to within the mouth; and space the knots one or two fingers apart as it passes through the nostril. Then have the patient hold the part of the thread that comes from the nose in his hand with his thumb, and pull the other end that comes out of the mouth with his other hand, feeling the knots along the thread as it passes through the nostril. Do this until you know that the corruption has been removed, then pull out the thread, wipe away the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and reinsert it into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the corruption. Then place a plug in the nostril made of soft clay for several days until it is healed, and if medicine is needed to dry it out, use such medicine. This is the form of the instrument used to cleanse the nose, with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	It should be made of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the instruments should be inserted into it; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and fill it with medicine to cleanse the nose; and there should be a handle on the instrument to hold it while heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the heart above the chest
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the head, and it grows and becomes great sores, so much so that it is visible to the eye; therefore, you should cut it at the beginning, and remove all the pus, then place the cautery or burning medicine on it; and if one delays cutting it until it becomes large, take heed whether it is hard, of a dark color, and lacking in feeling: do not touch it with iron, for it is an abscess, and when one cuts it, great harm comes to the patient. And if the abscess is due to pressure rather than a dark color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then drain the patient and cut it without fear, and clean the area of dry, constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You should know that when pus comes from one of these broken cartilage structures, it does little good except in some men. Therefore, whenever this happens to someone, you should examine whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then you should split the .ij. lips into one stitch, then cure them until they are healed; and if the lips are torn on both sides, you should scrape away all the dead tissue from their hearts until they heal, then sew together the .ij. lips into a single stitch, and tighten it, and apply powder upon powder of dragon's blood, and ground incense; and place an ointment over the powders, such as a strong or other adhesive ointment, and leave it in place until it falls off on its own, then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in sewing the belly; or with thread, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the mouth there are hard abscesses inside the lips, similar to grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; therefore, you should split the lips, cut into each node, and squeeze it in every part; then apply vitriol powder after incision, until the blood is stanched; then use a poultice of garlic, and clean the area with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of gum bleeding
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a growth arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albus". You should hold it with tweezers and cut at its root, letting the pus or blood flow; then place powdered vitriol or other drying and constricting powders over the wound. If the growth returns after the incision, and this often happens, cut it again and cauterize it; if it does not return after cauterization, that is how you treat an abscess.
des sordens	from sorens
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth inside the mouth between the gums, and there are ugly and rough growths; sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, or green, indicating that corruption has reached the gum, and they smell bad; so you should have the patient hold his head in your hands, and press his teeth so that they are exposed, until nothing remains; and in this way, deal with blackness, yellowness, and other discoloration, until they are cleaned. If what is removed at first bleeding is good, it's fine; if not, then do it again the next day and the third day, until everything is removed. And know that teeth need different forms of instruments to clean them according to what their condition shows, so that the scaler with which one cleans between the teeth has other forms than those with which one cleans the tops of the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat a toothache, it is important to wait as long as possible before pulling the tooth, because it is a very serious matter and one should have no excuse for not treating it properly.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Now, when the patient is compelled to draw breath, you must be certain of the tooth that hurts. Often the pain deceives the patient, and he believes it is in a sound tooth, and has the good tooth pulled; and nevertheless the pain does not cease at all until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this happen many times; and when you are quite certain of the tooth that hurts, you must scrape around the tooth all around to the gum; then you must move it with your fingers or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then hold the tweezers firmly; and the patient's head should be placed between your knees, and held so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After that, extract the tooth firmly without breaking it, and if it will not come out, take one of those instruments and insert it slightly into each side, and move it as you did before. And if the tooth is pierced and rotten, you must fill the holes with lint; and hold it tightly with tweezers so that it does not break when you extract it; and you must work gently around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it behind, which often brings greater pain to the patient due to the root remaining, or by breaking the tooth, as we have seen happen many times; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the socket with wine, garlic, and onions; and if there is bleeding, which often occurs, apply crushed vitriol; and if that does not help, cauterize it.Et se li estrais de la gencive et du dent s’an fust passe par le leu que li dent fu trais, si covient que tu le cauterises. Et se li estrais sont grans, si covient que li sainors soit en guarde que il ne morisse; car il n’a point de leu ou sa sangue ne puise demorer, si qu’il ne die por la saigece qu’il a perdut.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shape of the instruments, which are mute when hitting teeth first, should have long points and thick handles so that they do not bend when you hit the tooth; these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be made of thick, well-made iron, and have teeth to hold the mucus.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains during extraction, one should apply wet cotton soaked in butter to the area for a day or two, until the gums become soft. Then, use tweezers called "algefri", which resemble a surgeon's pliers; and they should be made like a file, and this is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with these tweezers, you must uncover the flesh all around the root and place the instrument called "althali", which is to say, tongs, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it should be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root slips out through this, that is good; if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms come below:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one should use this instrument which has two branches, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which looks like large tweezers, of which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	Let this instrument be outside so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the wise master finds by himself his instrument according to what his works and the disease show him, for there are many diseases in which the ancients did not teach any instrument because of their diversity. And if it does not break or pierce the bone, but protrudes, then he seeks the instruments that he needs, as I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and strong enough to hold the bone so that it doesn't slip, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines. And if there is a protrusion in the bone, and it is small, then cut it out with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When a tooth appears not according to the natural order of the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in virgin women, then you should know whether the tooth is new after the tooth, and is not in the right place, and cannot be filed or ground down. Then pull it out; and if there is pus with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is like a small beak, and let it be made of iron with a sharp edge on its end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And push it in and out gently due to the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others. And if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a special file as shown in the form:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is like the file with which needles are made; and gently file the tooth a little at a time by hand, so that it does not move until it chips; then smooth it completely at the end with a file, and if the tooth is too sharp and cuts the tongue, one should file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the front tooth becomes loose, whether through a blow or by falling, and the patient cannot chew without spitting it out, and you have treated it with constricting medicines without success; then it must be restrained with a gold wire, because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold never moves. The wire should be of a medium thickness, according to the amount of space between the teeth. If you want to straighten the teeth, take the wire and wrap it twice around the healthy tooth, then place the wire between the teeth, whether there is one loose tooth or more, until you reach the loose tooth on the other side; then start covering again from where you began, pulling your hand gently and firmly so that it does not move. The ligature should reach the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then grab the wire with a pair of tweezers and tie it off, and assemble them, and reinsert them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, so that it does not cut the tongue; then leave it as tight as possible for as long as it can stay, and if it slips or the wire breaks, tie it with another wire. It will remain like this for its entire life, and this is the shape of teeth and the method of straightening them, as you can see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when a tooth falls out, it is put back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and only a wise and experienced person should do this, because sometimes the shape of a tooth is made from cow bone, and put in where the defect is, and tied as we have said, and it remains and serves like this for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	There are two types of wounds to the underside of the tongue: one that is present at birth and another caused by a sudden injury. To treat this wound, open the mouth of the patient, hold their head steady with your hand, and lift the tongue; then cover the nerve wound with a large piece of linen so that the tongue is separated from its socket. If there is any swelling or bruising due to an injury, use the unguent of vitriol on the wound, and if blood oozes out, cauterize it with a lentigo cautery tool, which is suitable for this purpose. Once the wound is healed, treat it further until it is completely cured.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it discolored, black, or hardened, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch it, as it is a ulcer; and if it is leaning towards a blister and there is moisture, apply the unguent of spathumile subtil and drain it from both sides. If blood oozes out during your treatment, apply vitriol until it dries up, then return to your treatment until you draw out all the pus. Afterwards, wash the area with water and soap, and treat it further until it is completely healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Of abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	At times, bumps form in the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "almonds". When you treat them as described in the previous section and they do not heal, take care: if they are small, hard abscesses with a dark color, do not touch them with iron. If they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either, so as not to cause bleeding; let them be until they burst on their own. If they are white in color and the root is thin, prepare an instrument for probing, but first check if the abscesses are warm and calm. Then have the patient sit facing the sun, his head in your lap, and the servant grip his hand between his hands and press his tongue against the instrument, which should be made of silver or thin brass, like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	While pressing the tongue against the instrument, you will see the abscess; take the hook and insert it into the almond, pulling it upwards as hard as you can. Bring out any pus with it, then scrape the instrument against the abscess again, so that it forms a point; this is how it should look, like a sharp spike. The head of the instrument should be curved, one end curved in one direction and the other in the opposite direction, very thin, and made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument available, you can use tongs, shaped like this:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the tonsils, cut the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot water, and water and garlic, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water, or with peels of pomegranates that have been cooked, or with myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the bleeding stops; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses besides the two tonsils develop in the throat, so cut them then as you did the two tonsils.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, namely, one abscess of small size; and she had almost completely closed her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the opening which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died in another day or two. And the abscess had grown so much that it had forced open both openings of the nose. I quickly then pierced one nostril with a needle, and drew out a large amount of pus; then I pierced the other nostril and extracted more matter; and I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I pierced the abscess with a needle and cut away some of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the opening in her throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to cut away at the abscess for a long time; and the abscess would grow again and fill up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; so I lanced it and cauterized it inside her throat; thus it stopped growing. And I left those parts, and she was in God's hands after me.
de l’uve	of the liver
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the eye descends to the tear duct, and it is swollen and long, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is thick and round beneath, it is called an 'uve'. When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the pus of the eye is reduced, and it is thin; and it is round and not long, and it is blood-red or a light color or black, then you should cut into it. For there is great danger in this ailment. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way I have described, by its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit facing the sun, and press his tongue against the instrument which we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it out from underneath, and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned for cutting into the two almonds. And you should not cut further than the natural limit; for if you cut more, it causes pain and difficulty in speaking. And after the incision, use what we said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed. And if the patient is afraid of having it cut, then you should use a cautery on his tongue without fear. And the way to cauterize is with hot water. And it is done by the patient putting his head in your healthy mouth, and then pressing his tongue against the instrument that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and applying live coals so that they are not too hot or too cool; and use this instrument, of which this is the shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it has a stem at its tip where the medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and you place the instrument with all the medicine on top of the eye; and the patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus from the medicine flow out of his mouth and do not go down his throat and into his lungs. Then hold your hand over the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it become soft and the sting of the medicine lessen. And if you see it, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and wet the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument completely into the cotton on top, so that the cotton sticks to the eye; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then leave it to dry and fall off after four or five days. And if you need to reapply the cautery, do so, and afterwards wash the area around the medicine with cotton dipped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and use rose water, and treat it with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this way, take calamin, hyssop, oregano, rue, chamomile, avens, and similar herbs, and mix them all or some of them in a pot, and add garlic, and let it boil. And the pot should be well glued with strong clay, and in the pot there is an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it may be of silver or bronze, and one of the eyes is pushed into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is deadened; then repeat often, until the eye dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, because many things happen there; and do not do this unless at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an egg yolk inside it, so that the mouth of the patient is not too hot; because the egg yolk does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and this is a good remedy together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine, or some other thing gets stuck in the throat; so you must pull out what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can move the object; and if it does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the thing will come out through vomiting. Or the patient may swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will get stuck, and then you can pull it out; and if it does not come out in the way we have said, take an instrument of salt plaster according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the end so that it can enter the throat more easily, and let the head be raised upwards; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it be broken, nor push the bone in; and move so that the patient swallows the instrument, so that he is moved where the object is lodged; then he swallows it, or you pull it out with the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	The blood is sometimes healed by medicine, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when that does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press his tongue with the instrument that I have described to you. And if you see the blood, then draw it out with a small hook or with fine tweezers suitable for this. And if this does not work, take a long needle and put it in the throat of the patient, then heat the needle with hot iron, and do this frequently. And if the patient is suffocating from water all day, then take a full glass of cold water, open his mouth, and pour it into him without swallowing, moving it around with his hand often; and as soon as the blood touches the water, it will clot.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not clot as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I described for smoking out the throat; do this many times, for it will soon clot. And the way of the smoking is to put burning charcoal in a pot, and cover the pot with a perforated lid, and place the instrument's head in the hole; then blow your smoke into it, and have the patient put the needle in his mouth and close his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but reaches the blood; and the blood will clot now, and if it does not, then repeat the smoking many times; and let the patient be thirsty, and eat salted and dry things, and do not drink water; and then it will soon come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one draws out the blood is, when one can see it, like curved tweezers so that they can enter the throat; and it has a shape like a surgeon's forceps, and it has roughness from limed iron, so that it cannot let go of what it grabs; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	There are many types of abscesses, depending on their appearance, and they differ in terms of their perforation and size. They occur in two main ways: either due to their appearance or because of the location in the body. Abscesses in the head are different from those in the fundament, and abscesses in fleshy areas are different from those that form in joints. Each type requires a specific treatment approach.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if there are abscesses that one must not pierce until the bowel is healthy according to its completion; and there are some that need to be pierced when they become crusty and do not heal according to their completion, such as abscesses that form near joints. For when abscesses occur near joints, and one waits for it to become purulent around the joint, it can often corrupt the ligament and nerve of the joint, causing contraction in that member. If the abscess is near a principal member, and one delays piercing it until it is mature, it will harm the principal member. But if it is near the fundament, one should pierce it so that it may drain and heal without issue. One must not pierce a crusty abscess without digestion being complete, except for those near the fundament, which may become purulent and elongated inside, leading to the formation of a fistula and prolonged healing.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And one should know the time of piercing an abscess that is mature according to its completion, which is when the pain subsides, the fever decreases, and there is a reduction in swelling, redness, discharge, and discomfort at the apex of the abscess, along with other signs. The piercing should be done at the highest point of the abscess, where there is movement and an opening; it should be pierced from the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints affecting nerves and arteries, and in all similar locations without fold or crevice.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	For those who suffer from pain in a particular limb, treat the abscess according to that limb. And when an abscess is located in a fleshy area, it is best to leave it until it is fully healed and consolidated, as we have said. For if you pierce it before this, you will lengthen the body from which the poison comes, and it will be filled with much filth; and by chance, the lips and depths of the abscess will harden. And for any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb needs. And one should treat small abscesses with small openings, and large abscesses with large openings, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses, one should cut the skin and cover it when it has become like a drape and is deadened, just as one does with blisters. And there are some that are split into three angles, and some that are covered like a myrrh pouch, like abscesses in the joints; and there are some where one makes a round incision, and other incisions, and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those that have no head, such as a superficial abscess, should be pierced directly; and when the abscess is large and has formed a great boil, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in one hour but only part of it; then let the abscess drain until the next day, then draw out some more pus; repeat this several times as the pus comes out, until the boil is completely drained. Do this especially for weak patients, pregnant women, young children, or elderly men. For the pus sometimes jumps back into the body with the flow of the pus, which can lead to death without your realizing it. Therefore, be very cautious in using this method; once you have pierced the abscess, clean the wound and see if the wound of the abscess is small; if it is a plain incision, treat it with tents made of linen or old cotton; but if it is a large abscess with many openings, insert a tent into each opening so that they face each other. If you have cut part of the skin and lifted it around the edge, fill it with dry cotton or rag from an old linen shirt without moisture, and leave it for three days; then remove it and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding occurs due to your treatment, apply cold water and vinegar, and wet a cloth, and place it over the bleeding area repeatedly. And if the bleeding persists, use the remedies and treatments I have described earlier in this book; and if it is during winter, and the area is very nervous, place wet tents and clothes soaked in warm wine and oil; and if it is during summer, and the area is fleshy, place wet cloths soaked in water, or cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said; then loosen the abscess, clean and treat it, as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and see the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And when a small abscess comes from the head, it is the nature of us who are in webs, like the joints of a spider's web, and there are many similarities. There are some that are fatty and others where there is pus; and there are some that are hard and stone-like, and there is no fear if the artery does not cause opposition. And the actions of the joints are such that you must test them all with the instrument called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes later, whatever it contains. For if it contains moisture, then it is drawn out from above the long bone. And when the moisture is emptied, it is scraped without leaving anything, for it returns as soon as something is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and then repeat with the cotton, as before, on the second and third days, until you know for sure that it no longer remains at night; then cure the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed. And if the abscess contains fat, then cut it according to this shape, from above; and gouge out your fingernails, and scrape all around, and put all your effort into drawing out the coat in which it lies; and if the artery causes opposition, then do as I told you after. And do the same with an abscess that is stony, and in cutting and curing, as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the incision on a moist, stony abscess is lighter, for there is less blood. And if some of these abscesses have no moisture, and one came on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a pebble, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if anyone had pierced it, they would have made a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming on the head, before those that come on the heads of children and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the most dependent part, so that mucous can exit; and they are cured as they ought to be.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these abscesses come in the neck, and under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes elsewhere in the body, and they are many and interwoven with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as we have said regarding the abscess on the head; and there are many appearances of these scrofulae. There are some that contain moisture, and others which are malignant and refuse to heal. Now, when you see one that has a good disposition to touch, and resembles the color of the body, and is smooth all around, and is not adherent to the nerves in the neck, or to the artery, or to the channel, and is not deep; then you should cut it open on top, and scrape away at each side, and if necessary, cut through the two lips of the wound, as we have said regarding abscesses on the head. Then pull gently, little by little, being careful not to cut any nerve or vein, nor to cause any spasm or twitching that would make the hand jerk, and do not go too far in, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein and it will not let you work, put ground glass into the wound, or some powder that stops bleeding, and bind up the wound; then leave it until the abscess is pacified and the wound softens and begins to suppurate. And when the blood has clotted, return to your task, and finish what you have started; then examine at your leisure if there are any small scrofulae remaining, and cut and clean them. And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofula, do not cut it but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it drop through without causing harm; then treat the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you scrape all of the scrofula, then you should bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, since there is no longer any superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. Then you should proceed to cover the root of it and draw it out, and sew as we have said before. For those scrofulae that hold a superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce in the same way as previously mentioned, depending on it, then treat with tenting along with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is left of the corruption; and when the wound is clean, then treat with an ointment that promotes healing, until it is healed.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the record of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squint, the flap of the throat, which is called the "epiglottis", should be cut; and one must not make an incision by this, because all the veins and the lung of the patient are affected by the heat of the abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both armpits.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the throat's canal, one must cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to split the epiglottis, we must split it under three or four small splits, from top to bottom, between two circles, or according to the amount of the split in the soft palate; not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and those places where it is suitable to split the epiglottis so that there is no bone, and the vessels are long in between.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, he should stretch the skin of the throat to the very end, then split the cartilage until he reaches the larynx; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see any, and then cover the soft palate as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the cutting of the vein of the finger which bleeds through the place that is broken, and by the failure of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed that we doubt strangulation, bring together the two lips of the heart wound, and cut all the way to the cartilage without damaging it; then administer remedies that promote scar tissue growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says to do this only until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the lack of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then grasp the epiglottis so that the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease had passed, and it passed in 3 or 4 days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and cure it, until it was cured;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden take a knife, thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the veins in her throat;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and found her as good as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found that the blood which had issued from it, and I saw that she had not coughed up any blood or vomited anything except through her throat, and the blood was flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and healed it until she recovered;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and had the young lady been bled before she was sick, and returned later to her normal state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in cutting the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called a "gorge hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of yolk, and it occurs often in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it happens in two ways: natural, and accidental; where nature has no intent.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental happens in two ways, one of which resembles a boil that comes from an artery, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from a vein.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	And there is fear in it, and one should not operate by forcing anything except in the small one, and test and probe throughout the entire orifice.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it like a boil, and it cannot be opened with any force, as one opens boils, and draw it all around its coat, if there is none;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and surround it quickly, and treat it as it should be, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of us, all of which I will describe their similarities:
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is necessary that I say all the difference between dislocation and joint dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is a persistent fever and heat until the swelling has passed, and the pus has been expelled; then the fever and heat will subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no heat or fever or pain, and contains a pus sac which is the color of the body, and begins like a pimple, and becomes large;
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, either greasy or moist, and of various colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the ulcer, that you test and examine it first with all the instruments which are called "syringes", according to what its shape will allow in the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring into abscesses in the brain is that you press on the most moist place that you find in the abscess, and slowly turn your fingers, until you feel that the instrument has pierced the membrane, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then withdraw the trocar, and be careful not to let anything fall out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the flowing moisture is thick, whatever its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the trocar no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so do this in the shape of a cross, and grab it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side, and watch the skin where it lies that you draw it out healthy with the needle;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing is left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything is left behind, it will return to bother us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little remains and does not trouble you greatly, then treat the wound with some corrosive powdered medicines, and apply a hot poultice to the wound, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, then cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with what causes pus to flow out.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beneath is contrary to you or another, hasten and apply powdered vitriol, and let it remain for 2 or 3 days, until the wound suppurates and the blood flow ceases; then return to cover what has remained uncovered during this time.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of the probing instruments, and they are of 3 kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are 3 shapes that are called "albaret", and 1 that is called "breb"; and there are also 3 kinds: large, medium, and small, for probing abscesses of different sizes.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	They are also like needles used for piercing sorcerers' marks, made of brass, iron, or silver, and the black-tipped ones are more effective for probing fistula tunnels.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	They come in 3 sizes: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the aperture.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of warts are very varied, as you can see here: large, medium, and small; and warts that have two curves in three ways as well.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and warts with three curves and warts with only one curve, and they are in three ways as well; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of those that are cut have a sharp point, and some only cut on one side, which can cause bleeding or damage to the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these intrusions are the needles used in surgery, so that the patient does not feel pain when opening abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you can see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and we do not use them except in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling the slices of an onion, according to this form, with which blood is stopped:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and sometimes it is put into the place that heals by copious bleeding of veins and arteries; and sometimes they heal according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes men's breasts swell when they become rotten, so that they look like women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen; and if anyone wants to cure them, they should cut according to this form from line b up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then cut through the fat, and fill the wound with ointment, then stitch together the two lips of the wound, and let it heal;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags down and becomes soft due to its size, just like it happens to women, then cut through in two places above, through two similar slits;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one clings to the other at their end, and the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.:
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient will not rest, or because of bleeding, you should fill the wound with wet cotton soaked in corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it remain until it dissolves the remnant and the fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses which come from under the armpits are like hard scrofula nodules, and some contain pus.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain pus should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply clean cotton to the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove the cotton and treat with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofula, they should be treated as we have said for scrofula fissures, and if the wound is closed, a cautery should be administered as mentioned earlier.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is glued together, many times abscesses occur, and likewise there is swelling of the vein and an abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows it is caused by the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you will feel .i. dislocation; and when it is in the vein, there will be a visible swelling;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits and at the angles and in the neck and many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid the use of iron, and in the one who is at the head, one should also avoid it, and in the one who has inflammation of an artery, they should pierce through the skin on the long side;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then perform incision with a scalpel, and carefully cut open the artery, so that it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then push a needle under it and pierce it all the way to the other side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in .2 places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then probe the area between the .2 ties of a trocar until the pus comes out and the abscess is drained;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that dries up the wound, until the bleeding stops;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is on the size of the vein, you must hold in your hand as much of the abscess as you can to the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle under the area you are holding in your hand, and pierce it, and thread a double piece of thread through it so that you can pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess as I have said, or ligature on one of its two sides with a thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will hold, insert another needle all along the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and pull the threads tight in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then lance the abscess until the pus flows out, then lance the pus from the chest and leave what is attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then administer poultices and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do they come to the nerves when they are hurt, or from too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens most often in the shoulders and elbows and all joints where there are articulations, and it is a deep abscess, and its colour resembles the colour of the body, and in many cases it occurs without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is pressed firmly, the patient feels pain, and it is not deep in the body but under the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it does not move in any direction - neither forward nor backward, nor downward nor upward - and that which is in joints should not be covered with iron, or else there might be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is on the head or forehead, treat with spथमīle.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and cut it at its base.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is large, suspend it by the root, then lacerate and scrape it, remove the bone, and stitch together the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large dangling
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes they occur in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to their resemblance to ears, with thin roots and thick stems; there are small ones and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw .I. man who had .ii. or bellies that were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference in them, and they were white, and had thin roots, and were split open, and moisture was running out of them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut into them and found that one weighed 18 ounces and the other 6 ounces. The procedure for the incision is such that you examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist with a thin root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if the cut is large, and the patient is bleeding profusely, then you must hurry with the cauterization;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the knife, then take a well-prepared piece of flax and tie off the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then he holds it back, and does not stop squeezing the thread of the vein until it closes over the joint, and breaks without effort; and if the roots are thick, then one has fear of closing it similarly for the belly, but you can certainly close half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be sure not to close the vein which is of a dark color and of poor pulse and of milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of ulcers next.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil has broken
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of a hernia comes from cauterization of a wound or fissure in a syphilitic ulcer, and is on the abdomen with some of the bowels protrude, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries according to what is before, or from wind.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	And if it is from the rupture of syphilis and from the protrusion of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body, and it is a slight thing without pain, and opens through various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when pressed by hand it springs back, and sometimes it retreats, and if constricted, it grows larger at the entrance of the bath and from great exertion.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, then it is a slight thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrict; and if it is due to blood, then it opens through these signs of large and hard abscesses, and is attached according to a certain quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is because of flatulence, then it is enough to touch it, and the work is that you should look at whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary to leave the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you should instruct the patient to tighten his belt and stand straight, then sign all around the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to sit down soon between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the area you have marked all around the mouth.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then cut the abscess in half from the top to the bottom;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it tightly with a strong thread or string, and let it hang loose for now;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then cut the top half of the abscess open over the string, insert your index finger, and grab the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you pull it out of the wound, it will untie itself and push the intestines outside the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you cut the gallbladder, they take it at the root, and chop off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	And if the artery makes the vein contrary, go around it happily, then return to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and pierce the two needles through what you have done in a cross that you make piercing;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	Then pull the abscess in four places on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the hole until it drains, and cut off the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cup it when it is subtle and pus-filled, then treat it as appropriate, and lance the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as appropriate, and close the wound.
dou chancre	from sores [ulcers]
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the different types of sores [ulcers] and how to treat them with medication, including the use of cauterization with iron. We have also mentioned sores that appear in the mouth, and how to care for them. The ancients say that when sores are in places where they can be reached, such as in the breasts or thighs, and similar areas, they should be removed completely when they are new. However, once they become large and old, one should not touch them, as I have never seen anyone heal from them; nor has anyone healed from them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you sometimes purge the patient of black bile; then make him bleed if he has a manifest fullness, then prepare the patient .i. good site for the operation; then cut your onchites or ulcer, and the hair all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood run out completely, and express the site well with your hand or something, and if the bleeding from the incision of the artery or vein makes you feel contrary, cauterize it until the blood vessels are stunned; then cure it with another cure until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already discussed the appearances of dropsy, and how the gathering of fluid occurs, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment through medicine, and that which is treated with iron: now only this remains to be said; and one must not use iron in these two appearances: that is, tympany and hydrops, for these are deadly; therefore, when you treat this appearance of dropsy called 'eclites' with medicines, and the cure does not help, if you see that the patient is weak, or has other diseases besides dropsy, such as dysentery and similar things, then do not use iron, for there is doubt in these cases; but if you see the patient is very strong, and has no other disease except dropsy, and is neither too young nor too old, then you must treat him thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Take the patient directly in your hands, and the assistant presses his belly by thrusting the water to the lowest part of the feet, then take the spathumile according to this shape: It should be trenchant for 2 parts at the tip, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor cause bleeding.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then examine whether the dropsy is towards the intestines: you must split under the armpit on the right side for 3 inches straight down; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then the split should be on the left side for 3 inches; and if it is due to the spleen, then it should be on the right, and the patient must not lie on the split so that the fluids do not run into that weak area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the way through the skin with the instrument and lift your hand up to the entire spathumile between the skin and the syfac as if you were skinning it for about the thickness of a fingernail or an inch; then pierce the syfac until the spathumile reaches the desired location, and that is where the water is, then pull it out, and insert this instrument from which the shape comes: It is similar to a silver needle, made of brass or lightweight iron, and has 1 small hole on the bottom part; and 3 holes on one side, 2 on the other, and 1 on the opposite side; the head is shaped like a feather, and it is the shape of the incision from which scribes cut feathers.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the tip above is the alemele, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it will descend onto the instrument; empty about half or a third, because if you empty more than it needs in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he may fall into a coma, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the ailment signify, and his pulses; then draw the instrument and hold the water, which is now retained by the plug that stops the aperture that is above the syphilis, about which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then recommence with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do this every day, and guard against following until it remains but a little water. And if you doubt about the ailment, and you leave in much water, then the cure of the sepulture or hot sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he becomes stained from drinking; and the cure of medicines that are desiccative until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stoppage of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Sometimes children are born without an aperture in the penis, or the aperture is small, or it is not in its place. Then one should pierce it immediately with a very fine spatulum according to this form: then put into the aperture a very fine plug of lead, and ligature it and keep it so for three or four days; and when he wants to make urine, then remove the plug, and he makes urine, and then replace it; and perhaps one should not do it at all, because the urine which comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose foreskin is tight, if they are treated with the remedy of the skin of a young pig, as we have said, it will loosen. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are constricted, for some are born with the foreskin at the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate because the material cannot reach the penis, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to treat it is for the patient to lie on his back, then the head and shaft of the penis are pulled up like a feather, as far as it will go; and take care to prevent bleeding which often occurs, and if it does happen, then stop the flow with that which stops blood flow, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of pustules on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these whitlows come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are harmful and harmless ones; therefore you should squeeze them gently with a pair of tweezers, and pull out the roots, then clean and dry them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with тонконгоном until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you should apply cautery to it. When you have burned it, and if the ulcer is on top of the penis, and part of it is within the skin and part outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first; and when it is healed, cure the one outside. For when you cure them together, the foreskin of the penis is not secure from being pierced, and blackness and corruption come to the penis and the testicles; so cut away all that is black and corrupted, then apply ointment made of honey and flour made from pomegranate peel and eggs, then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if there is bleeding, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery has two uses together: that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and swollen, then you should tie a string around the penis and urinate among them; and when the skin is shriveled at the tip of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then you must scrape off the foreskin with an instrument made of copper, until the ligatures are loosened and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a painful thing to discuss this, then you should scrape off the foreskin with a sharp spatula made of copper from the head of the penis and the skin; then quickly remove it between two, and place a thin piece of linen dampened in cold water so that it does not shrivel again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not dismemberment of continuation like the other wounds; nevertheless, when we do this work of our own will and properly on children, it is necessary for us to do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not tell of their children's circumcision because they did not use it in their law, and we have nothing on this subject except what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of masters and doctors who performed circumcision around the glans, and on strong ones, and on all a new foreskin; so the foreskin shrinks because there are two membranes, and by chance one grows above and the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then they heal, and the pain is doubled, and in the healing which is from the nail there is no certainty that the point of the member is healed; and in the healing of the nail sometimes the iron slips away, and they ruin the work, and many times they heal in such a way that they do not need to be healed, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the healing that is done with strength throughout all the thread of the wound I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut justly above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Because when you press your hand, you cut evenly throughout all the threads of the wound; but let the thread be well tied around the skin, and let the manner of the first work be that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are only tying the thread around the rod, and then let him pull it in all the ways that he can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then hold the rod straight between your hands, and stretch out the threads between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, or any of the tools; then bind your hand to the rod and breathe on it, and draw it up so that the head of the rod is inside; then cleanse it well of the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the wound with a double thread, then tie it under another knot; and hold it for two days by the second ligature at the wrist and at the index finger, and press between the two knots, then lift the skin gently and draw out the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood run a little at a time, for that is the wound; and put powder on top of the powder, in a bandage glued with white of egg cooked and tempered with rosewater, confited with good and fresh rose oil, and leave it until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the force for purification is as follows: the two knees should be relaxed and straight, and the hands should be as large as the forearm equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the wound inside bleeds; therefore, you should stretch it with your fingernail, so that the blood makes an abscess; then, press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, hold it with tweezers, and then press.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it bleeds for three days, and what is under the skin is swollen, let it be until the abscess is healed and the wound slightly scarred; then press as much as you can, and beware of the part of the penis, it will not harm him in any way.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Thus treat the site of sudden wounds with powder, as we said in the treatise on powders, and if it bleeds profusely and goes above, it will do no harm; therefore treat it, as we said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retaining urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or dead fetus, or similar conditions, which we discussed in the previous sections.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	And if the urine is not released, and you see that it is retained due to a stone lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should bend over his knees, with his feet placed on his back, stretching his abdomen from above the back, and restraining himself as much as he can. This compresses the neck of the bladder from above, forcing the stone to be expelled upward and releasing the urine.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe". Its shape should be: made of thin silver, light like the feather of a bird; the cane should be a palm and a half in length, with a fine tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the method of urination is to take a double thread, and tie a small ball of wool or cotton at the end, and insert the tip of the thread into the syringe; then squeeze out the excess wool and insert it into the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then bend the penis upwards towards the body; then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel the urine flow into the void, and if this is not done according to this order, then the person guiding the syringe is doing it incorrectly. Then pull out the thread along with the woolen ball, and let the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and restart the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or scabs appear in the bladder, and pus has gathered there, and you see water and medicine dripping, then use all the apparatus called a “clepsydra”, and that is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other, as you see; and the leather tube through which the medicine flows should be such that it blocks the penis without addition, so that one can squeeze out the moisture and push when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, put the end of the syringe into the moisture and pull while squeezing the bulb; then release the bulb and push it in again; the moisture will enter the bladder immediately, and the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the shape of the subtle catheter used to catheterize the bladder; it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or bronze, and the head is larger; and under that there are two openings; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the fluid with which you want to catheterize the bladder, then tie the bladder between the two openings formed by a thin double string, and heat up the fluid on the fire; then insert the head of the catheter into the penis, then use your hand to push the fluid into the bladder until the patient feels that the fluid has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around; then thread a strong string through these holes, then assemble the circle like you would assemble a bag, and put inside what you want to use of oil and fluid and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the fluid reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stones, and their extraction along with medicines; and I have described the difference between stones formed in the kidneys, and all the signs, and on which type of stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will explain it clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is formed in the bladder occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the water flows from the bladder similar to water in its subtlety; and it appears as a vein, and the patient feels pain in his penis, and he can urinate many times, and then it swells; and most of these have stones at the bottom; and the treatment is easier for those who have large stones than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through a clyster, in order to draw out all the feces which are in the intestines. For they sometimes obstruct the retrieval of the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet and lift him up and move him from side to side so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it comes out from the upper part; then make him sit between your hands which are prepared with an apparatus, and his hands are underneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downward; then you can feel for and touch it inside him;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in the bladder, then cut into the bladder. And if it does not move at all on touch, then moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is male, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young man; and insert it into the urethra, and seek out the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press in with your finger, and push the stone out where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct the patient to extend his testicles upwards in his right hand, and with his left hand pull back the skin under the testicles in the area where the incision is made; then insert the spatulum tightly, following its natural shape.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And cut between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side of the scrotum; and let it be straight over the stone, and your fingers pressed against the anus, and let the incision be across so that it is wide on top and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	by chance the pressure of the fingers against the anus may cause it to jump out without effort; and know that there is such a stone with angles and edges: if it is gritty, it will be easy to remove; and there is also one which is beneath, similar to a grape, and round, whose removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	In those therefore where it has angles and margin, make the incision larger; and if it does not yield, then you must use tweezers which are like a file at the end, to extract the stone so that it does not slip; or insert under it a very thin instrument bent at the tip; and if you cannot manipulate it thus, then enlarge the opening a little, and if the blood flows out, then stop it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one stone, then first insert the largest into the neck of the bladder, then press upwards, then draw it out, and the smaller ones after if there are several. And if it is very large, then split it, and make a larger incision. For two things can happen to the patient: he may die, or the urine may flow out through the opening that the urethra cannot heal; but in any case, try to draw it out, or break it up with tweezers, until you have extracted it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have finished your work, then pack the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and hold it there, and place a wet cloth on top soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rosewater and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resow the patient up his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat the wound with thin ointment and thick ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and congealing of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this, which is known in such a way that without salt with the urine: therefore press your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, then the bladder will be damaged and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And then raise the wound with vinegar and oil and salt, and aid it in every way that you know, until it is healed; and it is necessary that every hour that you treat it, that you tie the two thighs, and assemble the remedies on the spot.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the passage of the penis, and stuck in, and the urine cannot pass; then treat it as I say above, that you cut it many times, is one excuse for cutting through this treatment. I have already proven it in such a way.Et s’il est de la grosseur d’une noix ou de un ouef, et qu’il soit en l’entree del’estomac, si qu’ele ne puet issir sus le passage;
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	And if it is the size of a walnut or an egg, and it is in the entrance to the stomach, so that it cannot pass through the passage; take a piece of iron according to this shape and have 3 angles fixed on a stick:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	then take a thread and tie it around the urethra under the stone so that it cannot return to the bladder; then gently push the probe into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and slowly turn the probe in your hand inside the stone, until you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come at once, press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the urethra. It is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another one above it, then push the urethra against the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of female stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone becomes stuck in women, and if it does, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a skilled woman who reveals herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	The third way is that one might not be able to find a woman who is skilled in this art; and the fourth way is that the woman's stone is deeper than the man's, so one must make a deeper incision, and there is great fear associated with it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if one must examine a woman, one should take a midwife who is very skilled, and with great difficulty force her on, and if she cannot be forced, do not use a cast of fine mire; but present her with a wise woman's bath in the manner of women, or a woman who knows some of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And be sure to check if the woman is a virgin: then she should push her finger into her vagina and look for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it under her finger, and he should command her to push her finger into the anus and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she should move the stone from the entrance of the bladder gradually to the root of the thigh, so that the stone comes out; then press on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the urethra, where the movement appears, and feel the stone in that place; and do not move the finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then pour the wine into the wound at the waist, feel the stone, and make the wound sore enough that the stone may come out; and know that there are many kinds of stones: small ones, large ones, rough ones, smooth ones, long ones, round ones, and rainy ones (stones that have a watery consistency). Know their likenesses in order to know how they will come out.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood flows, then apply ground vitriol and hold it there for an hour until the bleeding stops; then return to your task, until the stone is out. Have the instruments that I have described to you at hand to assist you in your work on humans.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood flows and it is an artery that has been cut, then apply the powder to the wound and constrict it with bandages and bandages, and don't stop doing this; leave the stone and don't pull on it at all, or the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has gone down, return to your task until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Ramice aquouse is nothing other than the gathering of moisture or white pus, which is located under the membrane of the testicles, which holds the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the membrane of the egg, if one believes that there is another egg; and this occurs when the skin of the testicle between the white pus that we have mentioned.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramice is due to weakness that comes to the testicles, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it is declining towards yellow, sometimes red, sometimes black, sometimes watery white, and it happens in various other ways.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this condition, for if it is in the white syphilis that we have described, then the abscesses are red, i.e., slightly long like the shape of an egg, and do not open the skin, for there is moisture all around it.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the skin itself, then the abscesses are red with part of an egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the skin and the white syphilis, then one feels it well. Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, probe all around it, for the shape is as mentioned earlier.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, then judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be bled according to their strength and the fullness of their body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and many garments are laid beneath him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left side and instructs the assistant to sit on his right, and extends the arm to one of the two ribs of the heart;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the lit spatulum and cut the skin of the breasts between them from the long side up to the nipple, and make the incision straight while slicing the skin of the breasts carefully according to your strength;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the plain syringe with a large hole, and draw out all the water, and then put in your fingers, and let the syringe fill; and do not touch the heart of the breasts, but only the syringe; cut all around it carefully, for if you do not cut it well, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound jumps out of place during your work, then reset it in its place when you have finished the operation; then sew together the two lips of the wound with a single stitch, and then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you should ligature the vessels that are suspended, fearing the flow of blood; then cut the skin all around the suspended area, extract the wound, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if pus is collected in two parts together, know that they are two abscesses; then cut the other part just as you did the first equally, then wash the blood away and put soft lamb's wool in oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another piece of lamb's wool in wine and oil, and place it over the two wounds, and put on top double cloths, and tie it all around according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two pieces of cloth and stuff them with wool according to this shape, and sew them together at the crotch of the breeches, and let one piece cover the buttocks up to the back, and the other cover the front of the groin, and the remaining two pieces over the two sides, and tie it all tightly around the belt loop of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes this cloth cautery is used instead of an iron implement, and you should hold a small knife-like cautery gently against the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have described, so that the white substance containing the water is revealed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cautery according to this shape and pierce the testicle with it, and burn it with this fine hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And scrape it in every way you can, until you extract everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this method is safer; and beware of bloodletting and the dangers of cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing contradicts you, then treat any abscess, bleeding, or other condition according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this procedure due to its horror, then perform a perforation as I have told you, and when you are certain through the signs that we have discussed that the pus is drained,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	have the patient sit on a high seat; then pierce the abscess at its lowest point to the depth of a finger's breadth, and insert the probe deeply into the body; make the holes large enough so that all the pus can flow out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the wound and bind it, and leave it to drain the remaining pus, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the white membrane does not allow the water to exit through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a tube or instrument used to treat dropsy, as described earlier; and open the wound slightly, and let the water flow out, and it will accumulate again after six months or so, and when it has accumulated as before, then the patient's days are numbered.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicle abscess
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this branch of medicine, there are many dangerous dispositions, and therefore I believe it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the procedure and what the abscess should look like.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come about in the body, especially in the testes; and this happens in many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is due to an abundance of sour and bitter humours, which are spread to the testes, or from a blow;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the colour of the abscess follows the colour of the body; and it does not cause pain, and is a serious abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and sometimes there are grey, purulent, and pus-filled abscesses, and sometimes they come from a burst artery, or inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is a burst artery, it is known by the warmth of the abscess when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is caused by vein inflammation is known through its appearance when pressed with the fingers,
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can properly make an incision based on this appearance, and on other characteristics;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and you cup the heart of the testicles, then they rise up, and the thread comes out from under the white sac, and free the suspensory ligament all around the testicle.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the testicle is already swollen with these new bumps, then you must therefore draw out the testicle and cup it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is swollen in the sac, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all that tension and cup it smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the swelling is in the rear location, then you must cup it all and extract the testicle, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, then cover the wound with soft wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper similar to .i. bud, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient feels great pain when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment for this illness is just as difficult as the one described above.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	Nevertheless, we will tell you about its treatment according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	You should make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then tie the suspensory of testicles tightly with your fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	as well as all the vessels that are near the penis, and grab them firmly, and stretch them forcefully;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut wide through the vessels with a spatula, so that they are exposed,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scorch from each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he inserts a needle where there is .a. double thread, and ties it at the first place where the screw came out, and ties it directly to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then he cuts them straight through the middle, according to the length of the body, and draws out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with the others, except we bind it tightly, so that no blood vessels burst to either side;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for in this way no harm comes from it, and if all the vessels are empty, one must milk out the testicles through all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the vein does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and they dry out and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the sinus
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The causes of this disease are either the rupture that leads to syphilis, or the swelling on the abdomen in the region of the intestines, causing them to descend from their normal location into one of the groins.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	This rupture can be caused by two things: either from a punch or kick, or from lifting a heavy object, and similar actions.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	The signs that it is caused by the swelling of syphilis are that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	And the abscesses are even throughout, pressing on the intestines because of the swelling.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are that it is of the section of the syphilis, that it causes sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close to the surface, and this is due to the escape of the intestines and the body from the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines descend with the feces, and are held back, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron, there is fear, because of which one should abstain.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of the treatment is that you command the patient to draw in his intestines with his hand inside the wound, if he can return them;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then let him sleep on his back, between your hands, and gently lift his legs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then they stretch the skin of the scrotum upwards, and cut all around the testicles;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put in the probes into the groin according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be such that the blood can flow out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then cut off the foreskin under the skin of the scrotum, as much as the white foreskin is hard all around;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your index finger into the opening of the scrotum, in between the white membrane which is under the testicle skin, and between the second membrane.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and push the testicle towards the scrotum with your left hand, and hold the white membrane taut upwards in your right hand, and lift the testicle out of its sac towards the body;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the testicle upwards, and loosen what is tight behind the sac;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your fingers if there is any wrapped intestine or tough white membrane, and if you find anything, put it back into the abdomen;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle with .1. thick thread made of .10. threads, and pierce the posterior part of the scrotum, which is after the skin of the testicles; after the scrotum, then tie the threads that appear, so that there are .4. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then tie them one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the scrotum, which we said was under the skin of the testicles, with a strong thread of .2. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the threads around the scrotum and tie them tightly at .2. parts, so that none of the veins that nourish it can enter, lest an abscess form there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and put the thread according to the first long line .2. fingers from that one, and after these .2. lines leave the scrotum which is under the skin of the testicles the width of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the others according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cup in the part which is under the skin of the testicles, as far as the blood flows, and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then administer wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and then administer the ligature that we have described.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilis that we have described is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of bloodletting.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it happens many times, and let the ligature stay on until it bleeds; and if it is slow to bleed, then use hot water, and put on what we have said, until it bleeds.Et s’il ne peut cheoir, si doit être incisez sus la piere, selonc que li semblet a voire, et laine moillie en oile, et liien, si com nos avons dit ci devant.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is performed like the ramifica that is together with the vein, in such a way that you ligature the vessels, after the incision gently from above downward;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then bandage me tightly, and lance the abscess of the one who opens it, until the vessels burst; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes there is internal bleeding, as we have said, and the opening appears; and none of the intestines come out into the rectum, and if any do, it is a little, and they heal quickly.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	However, if he stays too long in this position, the wound or fistula will become infected, causing the intestines to protrude.et se leu est grand et large, et les intestins pendent, si covient il que tu remettes li cuitel en son leu sus l’estomac, et tu tiens li cuitel si fort que tu puisses,
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	And this happens due to the extension of the fistula in the intestines, as we have said, for it is stretched, then softened and swollen, and the opening appears;et se li intestins sont en dan, si covient il que tu trusses li cuitel de touts costez, si fort que tu puisses.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment if it is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies on his back between your hands, then press the location of the rupture gently with the tip of a large needle according to the size of three beans;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	then pull out the skin tag underneath the skin and take a piece of rag and put it over the visible skin tag;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	then press on the stomach, then cut the two locations on the skin tag on the head of the rag, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then pull out the head of the vein and do not cover it with syrup or stretch the udder or anything else, as I have informed you in the treatment of the rupture of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, clean and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	Syrup is constricting and has no appearance in a hernia, and cauterization is beneficial in this case, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the testicles becomes soft in some men, because the parts within are softened, and it appears milky white; and when one wishes to treat it, he should have the patient lie on his back, and cut away the skin which is softened above the natural skin; then bring together the two lips with a single stitch, and if you see fit, sew the superfluous soft skin with three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	of castration
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, and because of this, I would rather not discuss it in this book. It is only necessary for two reasons: one is so that the veterinarians can respond when asked, and know how to treat [the animals]; the other is because we often need castration to help certain beasts, such as bulls, rams, horses, and other animals. I say then that castration is done in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the method of castration by attraction, you make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then grab them with your hand and squeeze until they are removed and you no longer feel anything. As for castration by cutting: you should tie the animal down, and cut the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then cut each sac at one cut, when you have well scalded them; I leave some pus and the thin membrane that covers the vessels; this method of castration is better than the one by attraction, because in the one by attraction, something from the testicles may remain, which causes the animal to desire sexual intercourse; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are of two kinds: one like men in that between their legs there is an aperture like a woman's, with pubic hair, and sometimes they urinate from it; the other kind is like women, having a small penis on the underside of their scrotum and two testicles. In both cases, treat them as you would any other patient; for those who are more like men, where the urine flows from the skin between their testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the testicles
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentigen is an abscess on the natural part, so disfigured that it is painful to look at; some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure. You must paint over the excess of the tentigen with your hand or fingernails, and scrape it gently; do not press too hard, lest bleeding ensue, then cure one disease with another until it is healed. There is also an abscess that emerges from the mouth of the uterus, resembling a cow's udder, and for this reason they call it 'cow disease'. You should scrape it as you would the tentigen, as we have said, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	of Errata
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	An errata is when the nature of the woman is not understood, or the passage is narrow; and it can be due to genetics from birth, or an accident from illness that came later; or it could be caused by a foreign object, or a thin or thick discharge, and is made deep within the vagina, or on the sides, or lower down, wherever it may be; and they should be examined during conception and childbirth, and perhaps during flowering as well. Knowledge of this comes from observing the dance. If the discharge is apparent nearby, either between your fingers or close to the vagina, then act quickly: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back with her legs spread apart; then form a seal with your fingers so that the thin discharge is stopped, and cover the discharge with wool soaked in oil. Then have the woman lie down for several days so that it does not heal over. If the discharge is thick and hard, you should treat it similarly to a spasm like one would with a myrrh leaf. If the discharge is from an abscess, then it should be treated by soaking in vinegar and then covered; and have at hand medicines that stanch blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, and egg white; then insert a large piece of clean linen so that the wound does not heal over; and keep it this way for a long time, and use other treatments until it is healed. And when there is a discharge from an abscess in the vagina, one should not touch it to treat it.
des emorroides	of Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are opened veins from which blood flows incessantly, and when they are old, they become thrombosed; and we have already described their appearances, signs, and treatments in a previous section. I will now describe those that can be cured. When hemorrhoids or thrombosed veins are completely out of control and no longer respond to treatment, then one must use cauterization with hot iron. Those that can be felt at the edge of the anus can be treated, but those that are deeper cannot. First, the patient should be placed in a cool room, then the hemorrhoids should be tightened with ligatures, and their roots should be cut, followed by the application of powder made from astringent medications such as acacia, dragon's blood, and incense. Then, the feet should be immersed in cold water for an hour, and if there is any bleeding, the patient should be bathed in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate bark, galls, and similar ingredients. Then, take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to the back. If the bleeding stops, that's good. If not, use leeches on the back and breasts without using iron; then take woolen cloth, soak it in plantain juice or dogwood bark infusions with old wine, and apply it to the affected area. When the abscess has drained, treat the wound with ointments until it heals completely; and if there is one called "albathir", which is red and resembles a rough patch, it should be covered as I have described for thrombosed veins, and then treated until it heals completely.
des apostemes de la marris	Here is the translation of the next sentence:
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs: when you see a woman struggling to go down, and desiring to smell aromatics; then the child hastens to come out; then you know that this childbirth is according to nature, and the afterbirth comes out with it, and the mother's superfluities are cleansed by good purification; and those who come in other ways do not come naturally. For sometimes they come on their feet, and come out of the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or they come on their stomach, or back, and are accidentally turned onto their neck, and in many other bad shapes; so it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and cunning in these matters, and beware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the shapes and how one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes out on its head by natural delivery, and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a chair or have women hold her; and give the midwife a small sponge soaked in rose oil or fried fenugreek between her fingers, and then insert it into the child's mouth:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and split the afterbirth, and squeeze its nail until the moisture that is inside flows out; and press the mother's belly so that the child descends, and if it does not descend, then the woman must be enema with a fenugreek mucilage of sisamen oil; then make her sneeze and cough up phlegm, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then the child will come out. And if both hands come out, then you must gently pull them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then stand the chair on the ground, and make the woman defecate so that she does not strain while standing; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, then grip the hands at the knuckle that is placed in front as mentioned earlier, and pull out the child, and reset it in the same way.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child is born on its feet, it should be turned upside down.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	And then turn it slowly and gently until it is straight;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then grasp one of the feet and stretch it out slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps up to the armpit, instruct it to catch, and make it sneeze with scent.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps out, God willing.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump out as we have said, then pull it back little by little, until it is in its natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, then take musk, and oil of vitriol, and melted gum, and grind everything in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply this ointment to the nature of the woman inside and out
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have her sit in warm water up to her ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is soaked underneath, make her a collar of myrrh and put it on her, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, for the child will jump out now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	for the child to come out onto his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this way, then put the midwife's hands on him little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then let him be laid on his back, and let his feet hang down, and let him lie on a bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bends his hands a little bit, then presses his hands on the belly, removing the cushions underneath so that it is exposed below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, he takes his feet and moves them around, then he moves his belly upwards, then he puts your hands in.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child gently; and instruct the woman to hold on until the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child's exit, which comes out wide a hand's breadth
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	We need to figure out how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if we cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed and raise her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the medicine that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, then study to bring the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and turn the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grip as the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the emerging of the child onto its neck, and spread out his hands, and turn his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I want to grab her hand, then slowly turn it, and gently wiggle it;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put on the muscle a poultice of honey and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and instruct her to sneeze; and make her yawn.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way for all of the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes out in this way for all of the secondine, then scrape the secondine at your fingernail, as long as the moisture is discharged.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child lies on its face and neck, and the mother holds it back, it will not be restrained and the child will die;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, so that you have placed it as it should be, and command the woman to squeeze herself several times:
adonques si istra legierement.	then if she strains gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not a strange thing, but happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Twins are a strange thing, and do not live long if they are born too soon.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiple, and are separated by the placenta which divides them, which is attached to the womb;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they are born just as naturally as one baby, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are bleeding profusely, then the treatment as we have said, and the assistant should be skillful, and quickly and lightly perform what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as it is best for their health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Some are formed in the womb 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or more up to 15, and are all formed in the shape of a child according to the measurement of the wise glorified.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and the surgeon must know all this, for by chance a similar thing might happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	then he should act accordingly.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are curing a woman of childbirth, as I have said in the previous chapter, and there is no progress, and you are forced to use manual intervention;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if you must know whether the woman is of sound body, and has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	the woman should be laid on her back, with her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should apply the ointment of .ii. parts, or she will be bound to the bed if the child is not delivered;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with alder and fenugreek and flax seed, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and musks;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then gently tap them, then press them where they are convenient to this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and be careful that the infant is not equipped so that it descends upon its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if he thrusts the fingernails into his own eyes or throat or mouth or palate or under the beard or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is on the feet, he should thrust or pinch and press the middle parts;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he should dye the hair on his right hand, and place the cloth between the fingers of his left hand, and tie it tightly all around his hand, and insert the needle into any of the places we have mentioned, until he reaches the hollow;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the shape of the needle:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert it against another needle, or a third one if you need more, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they should be moved equally from one side to another, in order to move it out, and the needles should be bitten down to hold it in place, as shown in this illustration:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if some of it remains, then anoint the ball of one of his fingers with oil, and rub that part with it, and pull at the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if nothing remains, then put this joint higher up, and do this until it all comes out firmly.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the dislocation,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must wrap it up in a cloth, until it is fully extracted;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then cut into the joint of the sole or the heel, and thus you must do to the other hand and foot.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is tight in the birth canal, or if it has an acute, gathered mass on its head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	you must place the spiny spatum between your fingers, and open up the head and extract the fluid.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you can use the instrument called "almidach," of which the shape comes from the instruments or chapters that follow this one.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so also naturally the fetus in the womb;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then pull out the bones with tongs,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the shoulder pops out and it is forced out, it should be split so that the moisture which is in the wound comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, the pulsing is light, and the pulse at the mouth of the wound is weak.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if there is swelling in his belly or his feet, then you must apply a hot compress wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and open the belly or the foot, so that the moisture which is inside runs out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are removed, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	then he should put his hand into the wound and pull it up to the mouth of the wound;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he should take a hook or two, and pull it out;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the wound is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has formed there, one should not work on it,
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then one must administer moist and fatty things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and use hot water that is softening and moistening.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its back, and you can lay it flat, then administer what we have said for a living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one has no strength, then carry the body away in pieces, and leave nothing of the placenta.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if he is affected with those abscesses that come in the sea,
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and bloodletting comes about, let it be placed in restraining water, and let him receive other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose fetus had been dead inside her belly; then another was sewn over it, and the other one died as well.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in her armpit, and it swollen so much that it opened up and began to discharge profusely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought long and hard, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong attracting poultice, and out came a bone, and after a few days, some more.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very astonished, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I examined the wound and found bones beneath, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman walked like this for a long time, and then suddenly a little bit of blood came out from it.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	And I remember this chapter especially because when the masters find something unusual, they know how to treat it effectively.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the dislocation back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the press, with which one is equipped in books; and at two turns of the two sides of the two lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	Nevertheless, the horns should be more subtle on the constrictor, and made of boxwood or ebony;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the staves should be one digit wide, and the edges of the trees one digit apart, and their length a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the two sides should be two ajustments of this same wood, which are firmed in one and the other, a half-palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two settings are put into the mouth of the wound to open it when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of ivory or boxwood, according to the appearance of tweezers;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has two heads two settings, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see to open the wound with all the instrument, then let the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and her legs spread,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then bind the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument under between his thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand along the instrument, just as you did with the forceps, according to the amount that you see the opening of the marrow, so that the operator does what he wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all tapered and have multiplied their likenesses; and when the operator has prepared them, they are more nimble in their work and more effective for people due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument until you have prepared it, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze using a condiment, and squeeze her hands to her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she vomits, all the better.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take a pot and place herbs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as calming agent, rue, anise, chamomile, casia lignum, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	All of these herbs, or some of them, are cooked in a pot over fire. Then put one end into the pot's spout and the other end into the mouth of the mother:
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the tinder until the smoke comes inside the wound; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then the scabs will fall off quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not cured, then order the patient to soak her left hand in oil of sesamum or in a poultice of alder, and then wash it in the natural way.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and she will find the scabs; and she should pick at them and pull them off bit by bit gently so that the wound is not hurt.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must be moved slightly to the right and left, and then pulled; it will then come out and separate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is tight, we have described the treatment of sneezing, and the fuming of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not become looser from all that we have said, then beware of pulling;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary for the one who is at the mouth of the wound to tie it to the woman's thigh, then cleanse it with an ointment of tetrafarmacon;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if she vomits and expels it, and comes out; but nevertheless, when she vomits, it gives off a bad odor in the stomach and head, and weakens the illness.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If this is the case, then suitable smoke treatments are needed: some of the ancients have tried smoke from watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one smokes out the woman is for the retention of flowers and secondine if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is made of glass, resembling a cane, and one puts the fine end in the nature, and the wide end above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and there shall be smoke over the coals, and the mould until it is destroyed, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born without their foundation being pierced, but instead have a thin, subtle membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	Therefore, the midwife should pierce this membrane with her finger, and not with a sharp instrument, and keep the baby from moving so that she does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on warm wine and oil, then the ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will heal, put a wooden peg in the hole and leave it for several days, then remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes the clotting comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be covered suddenly: then it should be treated, as we have said, with a peg of wood.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula in the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from under the anus are nodular and grow larger than those that originate in other parts of the rectum, or in the space between its two walls.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodule becomes old, it opens up, and usually releases a white pus or thin fluid.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are caused by what comes out of the body through flatulence or emissions when the patient passes gas, and sometimes a little bit jumps out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that pierce all the way to the bladder, and halfway down the shaft of the penis; and they can reach the hip joint, and the head of the thighbone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula, which seeps at the anus, and does not seep;
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and you pierce your index finger or anus, and pierce a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twisting, then pierce it with a thin tent of lead or a horsehair, until you feel the tent or hair in your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come out of the orifice with excretion or wind, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Know that she does not pierce; then heal quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has reached the bladder or the urinary tract, and the urine flows out, and it cannot be stopped by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then the tent is placed up to the spot.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no pain and the tent is removed, then it is healed without medicine or ointment.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and for these persian fistulas there is no treatment other than hard work and the folly of those who meddle in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not persian and is not old, there is hope of healing through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient lies on his back, and lifts his legs up to his hips, and has his hips tilted towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a tent of iron, or of lead if there is tortuosity, as far as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the pain is felt around the anus, you must insert your finger.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then feel if the tissue is piercing your finger; and if it is discovered where you feel it between your finger and the flesh, then know that it is piercing;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if you cannot work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can still heal some, but it happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and if aid is given, one should heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and insert it into the fistula as far as the base; and do this .2 or .3 times, until you know that the burnt flesh, which resembles an owl feather, has been removed;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then treat it with moist bandages soaked in butter until the dead flesh comes away, and then apply ointment to heal and seal the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is healed in this way, that is good. If not, then it cannot be healed otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters and does not pierce to the bone which is at the foundation, and between your finger and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula following the covering down to the heart;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut into the beginning of the fistula and push in the tent before it, and then cauterize after it, until it reaches the tip of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be released and fall out; then cut away those false meats that look like a bird's feather, and nothing will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the pus flows out, and enters between you and the wound, then cauterize it with fire or a medicinal agent.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cautery brings about two things: scorching of the flesh and stopping of blood and drying up moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then dress with tent-canvas moistened in butter or ground substances until the pus runs out and the flesh heals;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound with ointments of heating herbs that are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes all the way from the fundament, and is separated from the body, put your finger in it or in the fundament, and explore inside.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent, and between them is the membrane or skin, or it is about to burst, then there are no forces that can stop it except through one of three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep, lest you cut the lining that holds the fundament, and let the evacuations come out through there instead.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it is healed, or you remove that covering and clean it once the ulcer is cut away from the bone, or with a sharp instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then probe the wound, as far as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then examine the wound and seek to heal it, and keep the fistula in the part above the bone: if there is any lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes there are fistulas according to this method: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	take a tent pierced at the tip according to this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And he puts a twisted thread into 2, and puts the tent all the way through the thread into the fistula as far as the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is piercing in the margin within the foundation, then pull out the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger on the foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	And draw the head of the thread, and gather the two heads together, and squeeze one against the other, and let it be for one or two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes, until the threads catch the hairs that are between them, and pull them out;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then dress the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open, then make it open in every way you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one must not bandage it tightly for a long time, and then treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiny sputum, which one makes into a fistula, is very sharp and pointed on one side.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side it is smooth, so that it should not be bandaged as it should not be, as you see here.
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are of two types: sometimes they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there are small and large ones; they often cause blood to flow out.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	There is one or more of them, and some are outside the anus and some at its entrance; but those that are outside have less moisture.and are smaller:
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and sometimes they discharge a little yellow water or a little blood, and their color is like that of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain until they go out in a bowel movement, and then the hemorrhoids will come out;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you are in a hurry, and can't use tweezers, hold it with your fingernail, then grab it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they can't hold it due to moisture, then grab it with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of camel hair;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your fingers, then grab and twist them, and powder some hot powdered medicine on them that is in place of cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then enema the patient with a sharp and rough enema to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can come out clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	if the patient defecates, and if the thread comes out of the anus, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grab them with your fingernail or tweezers, and cut them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed and no longer fear an incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If you need to do the sewing in this way: take a twisted thread and put it in a needle, then bring the two ends of the thread above the needle, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too large; tightly pull the thread, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do likewise with all the others, and leave one to draw out the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place on the wound a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or with cerate, and place it on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then leave them until they fall off, and when they have fallen off, treat the wounds with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from dryness of the penis or anus
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is dryness of the bowels due to constipation, and because of the natural confinement, and when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	Then you should cut the skin at the tip of a spatula or your nail, so that it does not become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	Then he should be bled until he is healthy, as is appropriate.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	And if he cannot become healthy, then the bleeding should be repeated more aggressively than before, until he is healed and bled;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until healed.
dou fremit	where there is trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A flea is a small creature that moves quickly throughout the body,
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it bites and can be felt like a trembling, and it affects the whole body, but especially the hands more than any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a candle made of goose fat, or from the fat of a strong vulture, and place this candle on the wound, so that the purple circle encompasses the entire wound.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then return your hand to the candle and stroke all around the wound, pushing it in deeply and pulling out the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is made of an iron or steel candle according to this form, and it is subtle underneath and drawn above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so as to hold the wound, and to press it And if you see that the wound is cauterized, as in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the enema
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes the enema is made of silver or brass, or molten copper or hammered; and sometimes they are made from these small and large instruments, according to those who use them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who administer treatment for children and the feeble and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether small or large, is placed above, or the abdomen is bound according to this method:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and has a protrusion where the belly is tied, as you see, and the intestines are pierced inside; and it has two openings on one side, and one on the other;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and the belly where one puts the medicine is made of a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced all around with small holes,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each hole there is a distance of one digit, then tie into these holes a strong thread wound in a spiral around ten or so times, and assemble the belly like a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument in front with a strong thread, then colonoscopy; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	Let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the syringe with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the minister squeezes it with his two hands together, until it is completely empty, then withdraws the syringe and leaves the patient's legs exposed,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to come out, let it leak as much as it can; and if he sleeps for a night afterward, it is even more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you syringe him for a disorder of descending stomach, and the medicine rushes out, then you repeat it until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus or rectum, then the enema should be as fine as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle enema that stretches the skin:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already discussed in the division the cure of wounds; now we will discuss manual and medicinal cures according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and by what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that make wounds are by the impact of stone, and cutting with sword or knife, or lance or staff, or arrow, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	Or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the leg, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the recollection will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, one should take care if it is from a blow from a stone or similar object, and the skin is still broken and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you suspect a hot abscess quickly: then let him bleed from the head itself if there is a little blood coming from the wound, and let the bleeding be in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and let the patient avoid excess wine and rich foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to bleed, then let his food be diminished, and let him not drink wine or eat meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place sorrel on the wound, if a hot abscess forms, use cotton wet only in rose oil, or in astringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh and bleeding and has not been moved by the air, powder which I will describe a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the burn has been moved by the wind, then place on it some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be closed with sutures, then close it by sewing it shut, as I will describe for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and open, and only attached by a little, then cut it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin,
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods like testicles and cooked wheat, as well as meat and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rot in the skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut off the rotten part completely, and then cure it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely and cannot be staunched by medicine, then tie it off with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy: you should put this powder on so that the burn has healed.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of making the powder is this: take incense one part, dragon's blood two parts, quicklime three parts, and ground it finely.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply it to the wound, and hold it firmly until it heals well and joins back together with its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	bind it tightly, and leave it bound if it is not swollen, for one does not remove the bandage until the wound has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one applies chalk alone when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but one should move the wound with the cautery.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the cautery has moved the wound, one should not put any of this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but one should apply certain digested ointments, or poultices of barley flour made with water and honey, until it becomes soft;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then pull it out with fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is on the neck and it is single, there is no difference between it and that of the head, except that the nerves or artery of the neck are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a nerve, there is nothing else to do but let the wound heal and not put anything constricting on it, because it hurts the nerves and makes them withdraw.Se c’est l’artere, si faut la cierer.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuations are with the brain, which is the highest member;Car la chaleur les meut et li sang est chaude.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but for medicine, as with clean chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cooked washed also in sweet water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other mineral stones in this way, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut it and bind it, then heal it until it is cured.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is pregnant and full of fluid, then pierce it or lower it;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and bleeding ensues, then it should be stopped, and ligated, and cauterized if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the passage is guarded through which food travels,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if one cuts above the cane of the throat, and does not touch the throat but resets it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he stretches it gently, and leaves it for a few days, then he treats it with purifying ointments until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has left an impression on the bone, then he will;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are bone fragments, if you can pull them all out, and those that you cannot reach, then leave it until the wound heals.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it heal and close up the wound.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder I have described.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a deep wound from a spear or knife, and the patient breathes with difficulty, then know that the wound is deadly;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep but fresh and bleeding profusely, do not apply the powder at first or ligature it for fear of causing fainting,
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and returns to health, and heals the illness;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but it applies an attractive ointment, and binds it .ij. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you don't have an ointment, put old cotton in the wound to soak up moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there will come no spasms, nor trembling of the heart, nor twitches of the eyes;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good disposition, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal and keeps weeping, then you know that there is a fistula; treat it thus as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, on the front or back, then the treatment of that which is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, then stitching; and if it is small, then powder; and if it is deep in the bone, and has chipped off pieces, then want the wound, and draw out the foreign bodies if they are dislodged.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not dislodged, then let the wound fester, so that it will push out the foreign bodies.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And for other wounds in other members is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of a rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	There are great, medium, and small ruptures of the belly. The great one is when the intestines burst out of the abdomen, and they must be returned to their place as quickly as possible, and then the patient should lie on his back for four or five days, until the wound has healed. If it happens that he cannot bear to have them returned to their place, let him hold a heated iron against the rupture until he is able to endure having them put back in; otherwise, let him die. If this happens at night, the patient should be wrapped tightly around his waist with a cloth, and then the intestines can be pushed back in the next day. The medium one is when only the membrane bursts out, and it can be returned to its place without any difficulty. The small one is when only a little wind escapes.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound, except sometimes for the intestine or the nerve of the intestines, by which they enter.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one.
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one can no longer put the intestines back in if they are not gradually warmed.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	and when the intestines feel cold they contract at once and cannot be put back in.
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	And so the wound heals more easily, because one puts the intestines back in their place little by little along with the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And you should know that there are four types of hernia:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the .ij. common sutures occur in the suture of the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the suturing of other wounds on the body and .ij. other proper sutures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and yet they are more appropriate with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say one and declare each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and some intestine is protruding,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and if it is difficult to reset, it can be done by one of two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because the wound is small, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestines are swollen due to coldness.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it in such a way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak a sponge or soft cloth in warm water
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you can boil in water squills and cypress and pepper,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and pluck the intestines until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this wine-based remedy is made, and it helps to soothe and reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go down, then moisten the intestines with water or with a mixture of herbs that have been cooked.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for it is constipated and needs only a little to relieve it;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if he cannot pass anything, they make a small cut with an instrument used for hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first remedy is better than cutting,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that one must not cut without great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting it:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	cut inside the curve and not outside, and see the shape here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	then put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, for this is best.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is in the lower part of the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	you should make the patient lie on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and puts his legs above his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if he puts his head and feet higher than the parts below,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the .ii. parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you put your understanding into it so that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus one should manage what I say in large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what you are skilled at,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then have in your hand .i. minister pitous [a poultice] that covers the entire wound with its hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of suturing,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you should thread a needle or multiple needles, depending on the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave about a finger's width from the edge of the wound, and insert a needle with a strong thread through it;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierces the .2. heads of the skin with the .2. heads of the syringe,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is under the skin inside, until you make it pierce that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and brings together the .2 heads of the syringe the .4 together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then it pulls with a doubled thread around the needle of .2 parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then assemble the two parts of the wound smoothly,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave a space of two fingers and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie it to the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you need of needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the entire wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be medium-sized, between thin and thick,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because thin needles pierce all the way through the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot pierce well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	one must place the needles opposite to where the arrow came from; for it is not advisable to go too deep, or else one might break the limbs. That is why they should be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and one must not push the needles too deep into the flesh and through the skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not cut and open the wound before it heals;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cover the ends of the needles with wax or a similar substance so that they do not hurt the patient when they sleep,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and place towels or cloth on the ends of the needles to keep them in place,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it requires only one needle or at most two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second sew is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and you shall sew together the two heads of the skin and the two heads of the syphac together on a needle with a strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have sewn these heads all four together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then re-insert the needle into the part where you began, in the manner that one sews drapes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a distance between each stitch of the thickness of a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this cloth seven men,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound one man had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who had been stabbed with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm-width long,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and cut out the intestines, leaving them about two palms long.
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and stitch up the wound in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestines to their proper place after they had been out for twenty-four hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound healed within fifteen days, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And they had judged him to have died, and this was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointments, for I was in a place where there were no such things as ointments or medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed clean cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now, I will tell you about two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and pierce it through from outside to inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced through straight into the heart, then pull out the needle where you inserted it.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and have her pierce from another spot inside out to the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this sewing is that you sew as the leatherworkers do with hides,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and let the ointment remain on one side while you dress the other, until the stitch is completed all around.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galen describes correctly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is like some people do, who unite the two parts naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and they apply one of the cut heads to the other head, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	stick a needle or sharp instrument close to the pain, and pierce only that spot
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two gums of the ulcer
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and pierce it from the outside just into the inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the two gums of the ulcer
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both sides of the deflecting part to the inside, in two other small holes that are on the opposite side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the usual and most common way to sew.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen says this, and some testify,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	that one should sew the belly with two needles, having thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one needle must be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew sores;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the hernia is in the abdomen,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	the incision must be made lower than other places in the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is the same as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it happens that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as long as the fire has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then put back the intestine and the bowels; then place the cauterizing charcoal
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the fire has moved it, then place some ointment on it while the wound is bleeding;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tie the thread, and sew the edges of the wound, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with the others until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicine, put on old cotton as soon as it starts to leak fluid,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine for various wounds when they are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound affects the principal limbs,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then you should moisten a light cloth in tempered oil, or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it around the ankles and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or swelling in his bowels, and this happens frequently,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if you enema with red wine, especially if the constipation reaches the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces inside, and you will know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called 'young' cannot heal when it is raw,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is because of the thinness of their walls, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the testicle pops out of the wound, put it back as far as the intestines, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it has become old and turned green or black, then you should tie off the area that is black so that no blood flow comes from it,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	because there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligature,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two fingers during the part below the wound to relieve the extraction when the sutures are cut and the wound is cleaned.
de la routure dou boueil	of the wound from the boiling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	one can restore it in some people,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw a man was wounded in the belly with a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became a fistula and discharged fluids, and he experienced flatulence and winds;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him according to what I knew, and did not cease to apply poultices until he was healed and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sweating, I suspected that the patient had pain in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he did not suffer any harm, but remained in good condition, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimentalists say that when there is a minor wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take fine thread from a large testicle, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the tremor has opened its mouth, it puts itself on top of both lips;
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it opens its mouth wide;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then it shakes its head, and this happens as long as it cannot get loose,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then it has another tremor in the same way as before, until the wound is completely healed;
et cout la plaie.	and examine the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If they pierce the intestines and cause no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	one can sew up the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this intestine thread which is very charred,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the end of this thread a thin twisted flax thread,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then thread the needle, and sew up the intestine, and return it to its socket;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this way of sewing up a hernia is not useless except according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestines, there is neither healing nor health without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that any wound or abscess, when it breaks open, is universally called a "fistula."
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	especially when it is lumpy and swollen.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the green [vein] a hardened, white node, where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is as thick as the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes it is clear and thin, and sometimes thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes it is small, and sometimes large;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not cleaned and has no scabs,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	this is only due to one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is, by the smallness of the blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is a hard lump within, and on the lips, which does not let blisters form;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or because there is too much mucous;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or because the meat is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or because the medicine is not good for the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because corruption is a form of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the nature of the region is to digest late and to be healthy late, and to swell naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Then I will tell you about the treatment for a fistula, which is done manually.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	You should know that a fistula can occur in any part of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the face, intestines, bladder, or anywhere in the body,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it occurs in the principal member, and similarly elsewhere.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all fistulas that are in this way are of sad healing, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the place I have described, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you can see it if you take a tent of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, then want it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is crooked, then search with a thin tent of lead,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	because lead bends around the crookedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has a narrow opening and you cannot probe it well with a tent,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse through one of its openings,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture quickly passes from one opening to another, and cleanses;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then you can let it bleed as much as you can, and know whether there is bone or nerve involved, and whether it has been bitten by a snake;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press with your hand, and where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know for certain where it is located, whether it is distant from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, then treat it according to what I have instructed.
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and remove the putrefied flesh and corrupted matter within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is deep and straight, you must pack it as deeply as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then put wet tents in the medicine, and push them into the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put on healing ointments until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve causes you grief in your main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, then treat it until all the corruption is removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat things that are infected with a cautery until they are healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healed, and the wound returns as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you have not yet reached the spring;
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover it and want to reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way except by fire cautery;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if extracted by an appropriate instrument for this purpose,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many bones, pull them out one by one and leave none behind.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if the moisture is causing opposition, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if it catches fire and becomes moist and charred, and frees the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something causing pus to flow,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it remain until the pus flows around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have an easier time removing the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	then scrape off all the blackness until the corruption is completely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	and then dress the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a great deal of corruption, and it reaches down to the bone;The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it needs to be bandaged and wrapped all the way up to the rottenness, and then treated until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	And I will tell you of a fistula that happened to a man in his leg:
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take example and aid from it in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that originated within the body:
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	as long as the matter went to the leg, and it was swollen with a large abscess, and had no reason to fear opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the surgeon through their folly operated so much that the abscesses opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and a great deal of matter came out, and it became a fistula, and many openings came from which the body bled and moaned;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many surgeons treated him for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	as I was summoned there, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what flowed from the openings with great quantity;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red in colour, like that of a young boy, and had a yellow tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I pitched a tent over one of these openings, and then searched all the openings,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that some veins came together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	So I hurried and probed one of the openings until I exposed a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and found it rotten and piercing, and the corruption went all the way to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I removed what appeared to be rotten bone, and I believed that there was no other corruption except for what I had taken out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to heal the wound with hot medicines for a long time, but it would not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found that the corruption had continued into the bone, which I cleaned and then removed, and then I struggled to heal the area;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but although I tried as much as I could to heal it, when I cut into the bone by about half a palm's width, and removed all of its rottenness,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then he was restored with medicine; and he was healed and sewed up hurriedly,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and the work did not need to be recommenced except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of my fear of his death.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For despite the bloodletting, he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and was born a hard lump in the bone, and had good temper and no harm or contrary pain anywhere, neither when sitting nor standing.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be bound in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a ligature and tie it around the head of the bone which is exposed,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and have someone pull it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another woolen bandage larger than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and hold the head so that you draw out the corrupted flesh underneath,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it is infected, so that the infection does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a hot iron or a board underneath the bone to cover over the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must examine as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and examine again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part [of the body],
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover the flesh completely; then place a hot iron underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then examine from one part of the corruption to the other, and let him examine the area around the corruption a little, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut the corrupted joint, and the bone which contains it on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other way to cut it;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand, or in the wrist of the foot, then that thing is very strong,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nevertheless you must inquire about the corruption, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way you can, but do not let the vein or nerve cause you harm.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	And know that there are many different types of bone-cutting instruments and sutures for covering the bones, depending on the position of the bones and the appearance of the wound.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	And their thickness and their thinness, their length and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare for each type of wound with its appropriate instrument.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that your work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think about the instrument that you need according to what is appropriate for it.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulders may suffer dislocation due to internal causes or external forces.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	And when you have treated this erosion with various remedies, but they are ineffective,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you should cover the affected area up to the site of the erosion,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	in order for the patient to escape death or the greater harm caused by the defect in the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and if there are signs that the limb becomes black, as though it were burnt by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness, then goes the corrosion of the limb from one member to another,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and affects throughout the body; so you must hasten to cover it,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is through the sting of some venomous beasts, such as the scorpion fish and adder and similar creatures,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is on the head of the elbow, then cut it, and do not give him any space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes to the hand, then cut it at the joint so that the corrosion does not come to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, then cut it at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, that is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it is not worth lessening the amount of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and do this when rust comes to the foot: if it comes at the first joint, then the claw follows the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then claw all of the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it climbs up the leg, then claw at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy except to cauterize the disease so that the patient dies;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or bandage the limb is to tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and one assistant pulls one of the bonds downward, and another assistant pulls the other bond upward,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you loosen the flesh that is between the two bonds to a width of one digit, so that the bone is exposed;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then cover or bandage it, and place a piece of linen on each side so that the bandage does not touch the healthy area,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and brings about other injuries and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then cauterize the site heavily,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or apply some restraining powders; then return to your treatment until it is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to a certain man in his sleep:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he experienced a blackness that looked like burn scars;
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion began at the bottom of his big toe, spreading all over his foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he covered his foot with a bandage and it healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after he had the corrosion on his fingers, and he came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I applied striking remedies after cleaning the body, but he could not stop the corrosion;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to, as long as there was hope of curing the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the strength of man was feeble; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and healed his hand with ointment, and was cured;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no other remedy to tell you about, if one has need of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in a fleshy area, and remains for so long that it causes a great gathering of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they rot and burst, and in this state the bowels remain empty, just like vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin that is above is as delicate as a thin cloth.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not reach the bone or nerve, and such a malady is called 'healed'.
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called 'fistula';
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches the bone deep inside, then it is called a 'fistula'.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the wound is such that you should cut away all the skin around it, and especially when it is superficial, just like a thin cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	And do not be concerned about causing damage to the tissue.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	If you are worried that the skin will become infected, and the infection is not deep,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with scar tissue, thus the treatment with a cautery:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look to see if the breasts are large, and the bowels which are within them stink badly,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then cleanse them with an Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take asafætida, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and mix together, cooking in .i. vessel over a fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	then take some of it according to your need, and they mix it in water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and they use it as an enema on the breast, and compress the wound;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times until the breasts are deflated and the pain is gone.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes they are enema with ashes water,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, you should burn vine wood to make ashes, pour water over it,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then strain the mixture and use it as an enema until the breasts are fully deflated.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if he is enema with water and honey where there is a little quicklime ground;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you cleanse it with honey and mead, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the bowels move;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this and are sure that the breast is clean,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if the enema makes them defecate,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and you should apply a soothing ointment made from rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you can enema with other medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken about the properties in the section on ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the opening of the breast is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	widen it with a knife a little, and insert a tent made from Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or basil icon ointment, until it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave it only in one place where the enema can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the opening that is gushing below is above it, then the wound or lower down where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bowels are ruptured, then do not let them be sewed up;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot close the breast underneath as you wish,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	then prepare it in such a way that the bowels go to the lowest place they can,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bow is perfect, do not let a bad arrow be drawn through it.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast underneath as you want to,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	prepare in such a way: that the bow runs leichtly down, and let nothing of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolatory medicines to put on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are covered by a linen cloth that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then press firmly on the opening of the breast a little larger than the first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then there is ointment on another piece of cloth according to the size of the opening,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it over the opening of the breast to ease the bowels, and do not remove the large cloth for several days at a time;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and that which is over the breast, removed often to remove the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises above the breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast is open, and approaches the saints;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	then loosen it in the morning, or midday, and when you loosen the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	change to another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast flows yellow bile after many days, know that the breast does not open.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons spread after a long time, do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	because health approaches. For there are people in whom the poison moves slowly through their body, and others who it affects quickly;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if a swollen and indigestible lump appears on the breast after many days, you can be sure that the lump will not burst.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	And if the breast is slow to burst and is distant, then apply medicines which are moist in substance but dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as it defines omentum, because there is a large part of vitriol in it, and it is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take omentum, and prepare it with rose oil, and the vinegar of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and with the same mixture, thicken honey.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when omentum is not available,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it is over the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then glue a cloth, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer a long aristolache,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celandine, which is like flour of wheat and centaury;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in the use of simples or of compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put it on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is long, and not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is deep, and makes impressions in the bones, or in hard tissues, or in soft tissues;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if it is a wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of an abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or the foot, or occasionally occurs in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it becomes infected, and one takes no care, then there comes a bad abscess,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they decay and rot away until they reach the root of the nail, and sometimes they decay entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	it comes to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the shoulder is swollen and red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have described in the division, and the treatment does not help,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	you must cut away all the excess growth from the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	Cauteries are a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail pushes the flesh in, and starts to poke through, and the bleeding,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must put the fire under the nail so that it doesn't push against the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and press it up gently and gently,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove it all.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out and throw it away, because as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the tooth decaying, pull it out with a pair of forceps as previously described,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is infected and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must treat it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail of the big toe diagonally,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful not to cut into the flesh underneath the nail, as the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, place something to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of a sore tooth in the jaw
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The teeth that grow in the mouths of some people by chance are all fleshy,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and sometimes there is bone, and sometimes a tooth,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some are born at the root of the joint, or their origin is in some part of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those which originate in any finger do not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that originate at the joint of the finger sometimes move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the fleshy one is slight in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spathe.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born in the root of the joint, if he is painful to cure, hold him tightly.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	For one who is born at the tip of the tailbone, you must first round off the flesh up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut the bone to a suitable depth, then cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Judgments that come to both together come by birth, or by sudden wound, or by burn from fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	Then you should set that joint, so that the bones heal according to their natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or moistened cloths in rose oil, so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you could place them between two thin pieces of wood, until the joint is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If sudamen comes to any of his hands with the palm, he catches it as appropriate.
Des vils	Of the poor
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Wounds are large, enveloped, and filled with melancholy superfluities, which come in various parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk, work, and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you should administer to him sometimes a purgative of collyrium, and then heal it with basil.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment of wounds is according to two methods: one is to apply a cautery, and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The incision is made in this way: first, raise the leg with very hot water until the large veins are dilated,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then pull the leg of the patient from above the thigh to just below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then open the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide cut,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then squeeze and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the patient can tolerate;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bandage it, and instruct him to eat meat mixed with black vinegar;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommence the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, which hurts the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The raising of the leg is as follows: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair on it,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in the bath, and raise the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then apply the hot compress directly to the vein from the top of the knee down to the ankle, or in the area below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the base of the nail, and burn the vein on both sides until it is exposed when one feels it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black; and when it enters the skin, it looks like a white string.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then push the needle underneath, so that it is raised from the skin, and then it can be easily removed at the base of the nail,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then pierce the skin in another location, about two fingers away; then burn the skin over the vein until it is exposed,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then move it to the arm, as you have done, and then to another hook, as you did before;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then take another turn, or several if needed, then lift it, and tie it around the toe of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull and lift it until the second turn, then release it from turn to turn until it is completely loose, then tie it off.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	And if you cannot pull and lift it, then thread a needle with two strands of strong thread,
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and you draw it out, and you push it under .i. hair, and you turn your hand from side to side until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it doesn't catch, because if it catches, then one cannot pull it or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have drawn it out completely, then place on the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the bone is bent and twisted and wrapped together, not straight as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	if you must split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron used to open a vein is curved, and it does not cut, so that it opens the vein without cutting.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	It has a thick curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and thus is its shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm regions where no plants or trees grow, and in dry land where there is no moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	It may also appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from the pustules that arise under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	just as snakes and worms do inside the body, between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this vein's onset are that a great inflammation comes in the leg,The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the location changes, and the vein begins to come out, just like a plant's root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the wound is opened, you must wrap it with a piece of linen from one and a half to two inches wide, and tie it tightly,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the linen hang down to the leg, and every time that it comes out of place, wrap around it with the linen again, and tie the knot.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	If it is too long, cut off a portion, and wrap around with what remains, but do not cover the root at all until it is completely out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cover it, it will enter the flesh and cause an abscess and swelling in that place, and a serious illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this reason it should be treated little by little until the end, and nothing should remain in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and sometimes this vein is treated from five to ten fingers' breadth long,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one man came to me whose vein had grown ten fingers' breadth long; and when you cover it, it goes into a vein or veinlet, and pierces right through to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; and empty the matter within, and administer medicines in the area for several days, then cure it as with an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes there is bleeding from this vein, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or on the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there is much pus and bleeding; treat it therefore as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of worms that grow between skin and flesh:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called "bovine disease" in our land because it often occurs in oxen.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that grows between the skin and the flesh, traveling throughout the body, going up and down.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	The patient feels pain wherever the worm goes, as it dislodges the skin where it travels, causing the skin to jump.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	It is accompanied by various fluids like pus, blood, and other fluids, similar to that found in warts, tumors, and various types of worms.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one fears its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it enters and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and pulled, one cannot help but wonder how it feels when it pierces:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a strong thread, tightly bound,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then grab above and pull outward, and if the worm is embedded deep in the flesh, and you do not remove it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does is that it runs into the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, then grab under it and pull outward;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient's body cleansing with solutive medicines for the bad humors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and to avoid meat that causes putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	About pain caused by flatulence:
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vomiting" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then it moves from one limb to another; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arm, and I saw a small swelling on the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it rise up like a worm to the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	quicker than anything, as lively as silver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departs from that spot, and settles in the shoulder
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little while later it runs through the whole body until it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it turned around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very surprised how she moved from limb to limb like that, because I had never seen this disease progress in such a way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I have seen many who wanted to move pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because women had dry bodies and exposed veins;
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because this wind is forced to appear;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and swollen veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see this disease being treated, and the patient feels pain, if it appears to you as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	take hold of it above and below firmly, and then press until the windiness forced out.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the site; and if you do not see it with your own eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the treatment of those who drive out wind, as with foul pills, and serapium pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearance and according to the place in the body where they land.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their points is that there are some with large points, and small, and barbed, and smooth;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those who have .ij. angles, and those who have tongues, and those with pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which breaks in any member, breaks according to two ways: or in a principal member, it breaks,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it therefore breaks in any of these members, and the sign of death which I will tell you about below appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many cases.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not firmly lodged, then pull it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of a skull fracture when the arrow pierces the bone and hits the brain, and the pus comes out from above the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	are when there is cutting and bleeding and swelling and redness all over, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without a nose or ears; and perhaps loses his speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and the wound weeps white moisture resembling pus, and also drips like blood;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And if these signs appear, then cease the treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of a wound when it falls on the heart are that it is close to the left breast, and feels as though it were pierced into a hard object, not bleeding.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and occasionally the patient becomes mute like the poultry, and their blood runs cold, and they become cold and break out in a cold sweat, and experience syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	you will know without a doubt that death has come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow wound that pierces the lung is that without pain foam comes from the mouth, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and they sigh deeply and seek the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow pierces into the covering of the foot, it is located between the small ribs; and they spit up a lot of phlegm and experience great pain and sighing; and all their limbs move from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow hits the gut, by chance something indigestible might escape from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow hits the belly, and nothing comes out of the intestine but feces, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow hits the bladder and urine escapes and comes out, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is lethal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, spine, hip, thigh, and leg, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery and it is not venomous, as I will tell you so that you do likewise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man that an arrow hit him in the jaw, at the root of the teeth:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and drew it out from under the ear lobe, and he was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I treated an arrow that hit him in the eye socket, under the eyelid:
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was withdrawn, but its tip remained pointing towards the forest.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was large, from a Turkish bow, with a very light shaft without ears; the king was unharmed and no ill happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he shot an arrow at a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I cut off the beards, and slenderized it until I shot it, and the Christian was unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I treated a man who had an arrow stuck in his back or belly, and I thought he was going to die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, dislodged it, and removed it entirely, without any ill effects.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man with an arrow that has pierced his back and the wound is closed over:
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and left the arrow inside him, and did not change his natural dispositions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor found harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man who was shot in the face with an arrow and the wound was sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he remained like that without experiencing great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And drew an arrow at a prince of the king's house who had an enemy in his eye,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was fully drawn
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the wound after it had been healed for three days. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I wanted to treat it with a subtle poultice, and I didn't feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pricking and pain underneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I applied a cooling and digestive plaster to the area, because the ears were swollen;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the tip of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied the ointment many times, and re-opened the wound directly, and the patient remained ill for a long time.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he felt the arrow inside his nose; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied medicine to the wound many times, until it was open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I probed it, and felt the tip of the arrow which was sticking out at the site;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied this medicine to the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it healed well within four months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	then the wound opened so that I could pry it open with tweezers, and it would not close again;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	therefore I did not cease to treat and devise remedies with tools, until one day I took them with well-made tweezers,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	According to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, as I have described it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it therefore, and sewed up the wound, and the patient was entirely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you about the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your care into what I do not say, for books cannot understand everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters consider well very few things, and those which are present to them and lacking;
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	they find new remedies, and new instruments, in the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows grow in the members where they are lodged according to two methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or elsewhere;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which suddenly exits through the place it enters is an arrow entering into their flesh, and suddenly exits sometimes now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not exit immediately, let them leave it as long as the flesh is broken around it, and let the exit be relieved.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot exit, then let them leave it thus for some days, and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it pops out; if not, pierce around with a thin stick until the surrounding area is stretched, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and penetrates to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents I have described occur in the patient: then do not pull it out, but let it be until it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow penetrates to the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is lodged only in the bone and does not reach the joint,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains for several days without ill effect, then use the device to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is lodged deeply and cannot be removed, then apply cauterization around the wound, as I have told you; then clean the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged deeply within the body and cannot be seen, then search for it throughout the body;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it to an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot because of the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or nerve or vein in the way, then cut as deeply as you can to open up the wound;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are barbs holding it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you remove the nail which is stuck in it with two parts of the nail that you can reach
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	then break or bend the arrow's ears so that you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful not to break the arrow as you will then have to pull it out with more force.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do this in one go, then leave it until the skin around it becomes toughened, and then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood causes a contrary effect, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and be wary of cutting the nerve and opening the vein, and use your skill to pull out the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and put the patient in the same position as when the arrow hit them.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for that is the best help you can give them; and if you cannot, then put them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	Arrows which have come from elsewhere, where there is an opening through the skin or the flesh is swollen in that spot so it can be seen or felt obviously:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut on top then, as far as the tweezers can reach, and then pull it out; if it won't come out now, cut again later.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is stuck in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, as far as it goes into the bone, and widen the hole, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it can't come out, then leave it for now, and then try to extract it again until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is in the shoulder, it will reach all the way to the shoulder;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the arrow is short, and you want to administer a bandage, then he should administer a bandage with a needle
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the tip of the arrow enters into the windpipe of the instrument; and then pull out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is lodged, then he should administer an instrument with a pointed end to push it out and ease its extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow has touched, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits in the foot or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is close to the surface, and you can cut over it, then cut it out;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting into the vein and the nerve, and then pull it out, and then stitch the wound, if need be;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of tweezers used to treat arrow wounds is similar to an owl's beak; here is their shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	There are many types: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the tip that grabs is also like an owl's beak,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push on the point of the arrow, as it is shown in the picture:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs to push and to pull it out if it is in there:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common body veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Veins from which one bleeds are .xxxi., of which there are xvi. in the head,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	there are two points located after the ears, which are called the "two ears of wheat";
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are visible in each temple;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "spirits";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two windpipes which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are above the lips on the face, and they are called "augerich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and 2 veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the one is cephalic, and it is from the left side; and people call it the "wound of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called the "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and people call it the "wound of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and people call it the  "wound of the belly", and it is above the bladder,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and is the one that is healed, which opens clearly above the scrotum.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches:
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the curve of the armpit on the left side,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called 'nesse', which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are .3 veins underneath them.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The bleeding from the veins that are behind the ears helps with ancient cataracts and with emigration;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the bleed, as I told you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then squeeze the patient's neck with a wrench,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until they appear behind the ears, in two places, dependent from the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	place them on your palm and where you feel the pulse underneath, press in;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lance, insert it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut through both skin and vein well two times with the lance, and let the blood out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then he pulls and binds it, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The bleeding from the two arteries in the temples, which is good for old migraines,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and for sore eyes and blindness, and for the body of tears with pain;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the surgeon if he is as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and that the patient holds his neck steady, so that the two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel around your anus, and then sign with your hand;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then press the vein near the top of your penis with your index finger, and insert the lance underneath,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and open the vein at the top, and the cup, as you have done in .xii. other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then loosen the bandage, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then ligature it tightly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their bandaging and extraction in the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bleeding from the vein on the forehead is just as good for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the qualities such that the patient twists their neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called a 'pricker', whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the point over the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the amount you wish.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the neck of the patient, and tie off the vein until it is healthy and sometimes use a broad flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, the flames should not be too hot; and the sick person is crooked, for the bone is close by, and perhaps the flames will break when they are thin.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The healing of the two veins that are in two arms helps themselves, and tetanus, and redness, and a squint in the eye, and diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the nature of their healing is that the patient turns his neck by twisting some ligature, as mentioned above;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then heal it, and let the healing be through the transverse vein, a little from the long vein a little wide, because there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, they may break; then draw blood from it, as much as you need, and then bind it with a thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The bleeding of the vein in the nose is useful for migraines, and for seizures, and for facial illnesses,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as migraines and redness that comes to the face, and likewise when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient stretches his neck, then pulls his nose to the left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	Take a long, thin flame and insert it into the lip in the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein does not open well, and the blood will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let the blood flow according to your need, then ligature it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is how you make the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The healing of the two testicles helps with straining of the groin, and at the beginning of masturbation, and with many illnesses, and with impetigo, and with ulcers, and with herpes, and with stomachaches;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of the healing are such that the patient should hold his neck still under either side, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and the master should stand above the patient's head, and the patient should sit on a chair,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein of the arm, then draw blood in a tempered manner, as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do another one in the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and gently compress the veins.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not choke; and leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	About bleeding from the lips:
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	Bleeding from the veins of the lips helps with sores in the mouth and gum corruption and lip splits and toothaches.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of healing is to make the patient sit before you, and strain his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and you can recognize them because they are black, and because around them there are fine black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	therefore grasp one and the other, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	take the thickest one from each part, and do the same with the two veins above and below, for it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of bleeding under the tongue:
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	Bleeding from the veins under the tongue helps after bleeding the cephalic vein, and it is good for tightness in the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the bleeder is such that the patient holds his hands out in front of the sun, and touches the tongue, and looks under each cheek for a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Clean both of them, and do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	Veins of the neck from which one commonly bleeds are bled in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either with a very thin mirtin flame, or an olive-shaped sharp instrument, which is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	They are wide and thin according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mortar is highly renowned, and it is wide as you can see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open veins that are smooth and filled with dark blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the shape of the olive-shaped mortar:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more pointed and refined, and is used for bleeding subtle veins, where there is thin and yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilic, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and the surgeon should bleed it, and be wary of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he pierces the artery, and bleeding ensues, then it must be stanched, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be seized, but cut off as if it were a branch.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basil does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace it with another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Or, if you want to use a vein in his arm, open the vein in the arm: it will open clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply the cupping glass to the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to find the location for bleeding, you must stretch out the arm and touch the area until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the area with the pointer finger, then tie the arm, and press the vein with a flame to anesthetize it;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware of piercing an artery when you see the area swell; avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulge upward like a child's urine, and the blood is red and thin, know that this is arterial blood:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry, then place your finger over it firmly, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, as often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the arm be tied, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and let him remain quiet, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is staunched, and he vomits, and the medicine is not present, then press on the artery until it is closed, and stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of raw hide, cut it in half, and tie the wound tightly with one half until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then stanch it with a powder that stops bleeding, as we have said.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the bandages are not wrapped tightly in various positions because of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The bleeding of a vein in the middle, if it draws blood from the head above and from the body below,
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	this is because it is composed of basil and Cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the bleed should be applied to the nerve underneath, and if it pricks too much, and it finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the saint is grieved, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens in many places, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you should heal it with the instrument gently; and cut the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they will cut it through the long one.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The healing of the cephalic vein helps, that it draws blood from the head and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to cauterize them with the flame of an olive branch or a myrtle twig, for that is the safest of all veins, for it has no nerves or arteries underneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, one must seek out the lightest vein, and if one misses the first time, one should try again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance, some men's veins swell up, if one misses the first time, but it does not hurt them.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the cautery depends on your skill.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about bleeding is that it is only done to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and bleeding should be done in one of the three veins: these are the cephalic, the fast, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed in the beginning of the morning, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of digestion are apparent;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bleed him on the first day or the third, after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bleeding which is administered for illnesses does not have a specific time, but rather when there is need, at any hour and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and one should not bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus before the fourth month up to the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the very old who have passed 60 years be bled.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when one wishes to bleed themselves, in whatever manner, they should first cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if they have retained feces, so that the veins do not attract harmful, excess matter from the intestines to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	one must not bleed those who are bloated with meat, nor the drunk, so long as their condition persists, nor the sickly;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and one must bleed with caution after a colic attack, vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent sexual activity, as well as due to exertion, waking, fasting, or any other cause, either from the arms or legs;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly the humors, if the blood is thick, through meats and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, if nothing else weakens him, to sutilize the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal the vein of the foot around the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep that day from work and pointing and lust and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and lies down and joins his arms, and the bandages are placed higher than the person being bandaged, and he rubs his arm two or three times,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then tightens the bandage above the elbow, for if it is too loose or too tight, he cannot move his arm;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rubs the area around the hands, until the veins swell and can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moistens the bandages with a little old oil, then puts his finger from his left hand onto the vein under the elbow where he wants to bandage,
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	that the vein does not burst upon striking.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins which flow like cords in the body, and some that are filled with wind,
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one applies fire to it, it retreats from the flame and cannot open the vein, and so it is with some people;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, so it is necessary for the surgeons to be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works the first time, that is good; if not, do it again a little lower down at the same spot or above, if the area isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient is afraid, let him be for one or two days, and don't bind his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps warm abscesses will form; do not enter the bath, then restart bleeding if it pleases her;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the vein is small, cut it short and firmly, and you doubt that it won't let out as much blood as you want, then pierce that same vein directly with a flame.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work on it a little gently so that the skin is not swollen; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swollen, do not restart the bleeding, and put a little lamb's wool saturated in oil on it, because the oil lightens the body of blood, and in this place the lamb's wool that has been used becomes medicine.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and in this way administer the oil in every bleeding vein that you treat to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same thing happens with triacle and bowe, when it is applied to the area; the blood and pus are drawn out when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, especially when it is not cleaned out more than once or the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	take an sponge moistened in warm water and salt, place it over the site, and hold it there for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	You should do this after the blood has drained from the vein. If it remains there for several days and a black or green color appears, this is not harmful.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if you see any swelling, apply an ointment of aloe or myrrh mixed with rosewater, balsam, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there occurs an abscess and appearance at the exit of the vein: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of your hand, then is that appearance evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore beware that you do not place anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps it pierces through an artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to its quantity and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is full and swollen, and needs bloodletting, that they make him a larger wound, and the flames be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and they must bleed little and often, and it behoves to bleed him by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of bleeding is safe from bloodletting and cutting of nerves, and is better than bleeding long or wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for one whose body needs bleeding, one should give soft bread in pomegranate juice; if he is scorched, then draw out blood four or five times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, he should eat before bleeding wet bread in a syrup of mace, or in a syrup of aromatic honey with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he faints during bleeding, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that he inhales the scent of warm meat broth and subtle, fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things we have mentioned in the chapter on syncope, for the opening of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to empty his arm and bleed again, it is necessary that when he is weakened by a great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time according to the amount of his continued strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wishes to open his arm after the first bleeding, and has strong pulse, should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wishes to bleed elsewhere, should do so on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is a great deal of blood within the body which has been heated, and it causes fever; therefore one should draw out a large quantity and widen the vein until it bleeds freely.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you should know all about bleeding, and put your hand on the pulse when he is bleeding, so that death does not come from the vein.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times when the surgeon is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you should not press firmly on a vein when opening it for the second time, if the incision is closed and bleeding has stopped.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	And if it is bent, do not extend the arm suddenly, because that would be harmful.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it heal the second time; or you may touch it with the tip of the flame, until the frozen blood at the incision melts and comes out,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on top .i. little of salt dissolved in water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and don't constrict it at all until the abscess is drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to let blood a second time, then bleed in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arms are healthy in the area of the vein in the head because it is compound.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of healing is for the patient to put his hand in hot water until the swelling turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then let him be bandaged lightly so that the vein is visible, neither too tightly nor too loosely;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide enough, and let him be healed near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in winter, do not put the hand back in hot water, because it is warmer in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the bleeding of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves in it.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The bleeding of the right hand vein is good for all diseases of the liver, and here is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Press the hand, and put it in warm water until the vein swells, as one can see;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if it bleeds across, and you press it from all sides, it will not hurt at all;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath, completely stripped of flesh.
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	then put your hand in hot water if the blood has congealed in the wound and cannot flow out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have stopped the bleeding as much as is necessary, then put oil and silk on the vein to stop it, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The bleeding in the left hand is beneficial for the disease of the mouse, and do everything just as I told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The medicine for gout is good for all diseases underneath the body.
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the knees, hips, and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And its qualities are such that the patient should put his foot in warm water, and rub the vein until it bursts,
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the ankle, and further up the foot there are many veins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	then cut it off at the shank, or at the ankle, whichever is easier.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cut it off at the foot, then guard against the nerves underneath, and cut it through horizontally as well as vertically; and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it needs to be cut the first time, then do it again the second time above a little, for the place is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not hesitate to cut the nerve, as we have said, and similarly do the same with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The location of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its pulsation indicates the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its pulsation is such that the patient should twist four times in either direction,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then pulse in all ways that you can, and by crossing over;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is better that you cut it, for the wound will heal, and she has been very relieved by many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, any cut on the side of the foot that is open, towards the little toe, and take care of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make the blood flow until you see it, and then loosen the bandage, and place cotton on it and bind it tightly; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Of wound bleeding
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made of horns, or brass, or glass; and bloodletting is done in two ways: by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this bloodletting without striking is also done in two ways: either with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and bloodletting that is done by striking and drawing blood is done in 14 places on the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	one of which is all over the head, and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others on each side of the neck, and the ventouse under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventouse on the two shoulders; and the ventouse above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the ventouses in the two arms; and the ventouses in the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the ventouses at the two ankles; and the ventosion does not draw blood, except from the small veins that are scattered throughout the body,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason it weakens none at all, just as one does with bleeding from a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it must not be administered, neither with all fire nor with any heat, in any disease that comes from fullness, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, because of necessity or habit, one must bleed, then we shall administer it every hour at the beginning or end of the month, and in each season.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are some who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if they experience blockage and redness on their face, head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and some who spit up blood in their mouths, and have swollen tongues, and vomit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if they dream, see through the night blood, and suffer from fainting and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially if they occur during the month, we command them to fast after the third hour of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The bleeding of the nose is useful for headaches that originate in the head and affect the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this venting is in place of bleeding from the head,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it should not be used by those with a cold complexion or who have catarrh, as it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those with cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become oblate, and for this reason one should place the cupping glass a little lower down in case of oblateness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The ventouse on the neck is located where the brain meets the skull, and for this reason it is useful for constriction of the feet:
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and for splitting of the gullet, and for hernia, and for retention;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and one should not push it too hard, because if it is held too tightly, it causes oblateness or stomach ache and heartache.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	Winding pains around the .12 ribs of the neck cause headache and blindness, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of bleeding basilic vein; and you must instruct the surgeon to express their hand in placing it, so that they do not press the artery and come rushing blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Winding pains below the chin cause mouth disease and gum corruption, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of bleeding from the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Winding pains in the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	Ventilation of the armpits is as good as three veins in the arm
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	because it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, because the area is naked of flesh and underneath are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping glass placed on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids and diseases underneath; it should be large, made of copper, and well-suctioning; and if it were thin, it could break and cause large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg cupping glasses heal very effectively, for they draw blood from the entire body and are good for old pains in the hips, and the joints of the loins, and the bladder, and draw out humours; and are placed over the two sciatic nerves, and over the two ankles, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring fainting in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method for applying the cupping glass is that you place it first empty, and suck gently, and press firmly, and move equally, and do not stop doing so until you see the area red and swollen, and the redness of the blood appears; then stop, and remove the cupping glasses, and take care in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have very thin skin and clear pores; therefore one must strike only once, and one must make wide wounds, and a little deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, then it is necessary to strike twice: the first time to open the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time; and when we want to draw little by little, we only need to strike once.Et se li sans est gros et espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois, et la quarte.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we bleed often; and if the blood is thick, we pierce it with a needle, and the tip is so that the heart is pierced suddenly,
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is suitable for those with thick and hard skin, and who have tight pores, that you grease the suction cup openings with heating and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is for a wound, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or squash seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is for an eye problem, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or of fennel, and similar oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the person being healed has tender flesh with large pores, then no oil should be used,
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but afterwards they should wash with rosewater, or cold water, or mulberry water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have a lot of moisture should get up from garlic, or myrrh water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large tumors rise from old wine, or from dried water, or from the infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and should not be bled by cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or two; and should not sleep after being bled,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary for him to fast when he is to be bled and when he has been bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against the patient being colic-prone, and if the blood is too thin and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if they should eat cool things, such as sour apples, endive, lettuce, garlic, and similar items.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and drink buttermilk, and castor oil, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cool complexion should eat honey syrup, and mild, aged wine, and drink buttermilk, and castor oil, and eat small birds and squabs;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day that he vomits, he should drink more than he eats;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and one must give some people treacle or musk before or after venting, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and thin out the wine, but those who are hot-tempered should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leeches that are used without bleeding are those that are used on the liver, and on the mumps, and on the stone, and on the belly, and the groin, and the hips, because these members cannot bear to be bled on the eyes,
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and it is not done except to draw blood from one member to another,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place cups on the breasts when the nipples are healthy; to remove the viscosity from a limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and chest to reduce swelling in a limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it alleviates pain, when there is gangrene or a stone, and by its attractive power it removes the gangrene, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and it does the same when placed over the liver and spleen when there is retained wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered empty just to draw out; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in diseases of the lungs, and in such a way one fills the glass with hot water, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the fire cupping instrument is as follows:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has a diameter of two inches and a half, and it has on the side around the middle a small hole, as large as to push through an awl,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and is made of bronze, smooth in front so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and has a hook bent out of iron or steel, to grip a candle
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and some are large and some small depending on the illnesses and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the ventouses of children are different from adults, and of the thin than the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus place this ventouse on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or .i. liniment, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod which is inside the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup and does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the body, and your fingers should be on the hole that we mentioned, so that when one wishes, the vapors will go in and then one removes the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and they take the liniment as before, and repeat it often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	Therefore, in the cupping glass which is administered for pleurisy, and all acute diseases, has no spout nor hole, and is not removed until it is full of water, and is placed only on the affected member;
et c’est li forme:	and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Leeches are not used except in members where cupping glasses cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in bare flesh, such as skin or nerve, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of its use is such that when you find sores that are in clean, still water without putrefaction, you should take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place one leech in clean water, until they are familiar and do not struggle.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	Then cleanse the wound with a vein-opening treatment and leeches, then rub the affected member until it turns red, and apply the leeches.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	And when they are swollen and start to suck, if there is a place where a leech can be placed, put one there, for this helps a great deal.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then it raises the area of pain, then with water, very well, and then he sprinkles it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	And if the place heals too quickly after the bite of a snake, he wets a linen cloth in cold water and places it until the swelling is reduced;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	And if the bites are multiple, he places powdered vitriol or galena and similar things until it is reduced;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	Or you place half peeled peas on the area, leaving them until they stick to the area, and it will stop bleeding immediately;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, take other leeches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the leeches will not attach, then rub the area of fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle so that some blood emerges,
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then place them on top, and as soon as they smell the blood, they will attach;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are excreting, then dust them with a little powdered aloes and salt, or ashes, and they will suck strongly now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is a cure for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the wise men of old did not speak of this chapter in their books, nor read any letters about it;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the knowledge of it is strange in our land, for I never found any good [knowledge] of it;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it except through the study of ancient books, in which I have labored until I have mastered their wisdom, and through experimentation, and through the habits of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, just as I did in the two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we should say in the prologue of this book about the matters contained within, and the chapters where the sage sets his understanding, and dwells upon truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or break occurs in anyone, you should hurry to treat the patient from both sides with cauterization, if there is no impediment, such as weakness of body, or pregnancy, or old age:
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the weather is very hot or too cold; and eat cool foods, that is, cold meats, and game and kid meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have a doubt about a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb; then let the patient return to his first treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, one should nourish the patient with foods that promote swelling, or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, testes, feet, pig's belly, offal, freshwater fish, and full-bodied wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	Because with more swelling, the break will heal faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the elderly and the frail cannot heal well or unite according to their nature due to the dryness of their members, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of young children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but have no care, reset it on the broken bone .i. large tendons that stretch and join the limb together, as much as he forces it so that it is as it was before; and do not stop at all in his work, and for this one must eat lots of meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter about all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a fracture which goes towards the root, and another in sharpening, as with the tip of a writing quill.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break throughout a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each way, it has its own remedy and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the fracture of the bone is due to twisting, and becomes apparent by swelling, and makes a noise when pressed with the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no crookedness nor swelling, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but there may be crookedness, or fissure, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	You must not move it with your hand, but apply remedies that are described below, and then hold it steady with a gentle grip.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And you should know that the fracture that goes into the bone, and where the two parts are disjoined, they must now be put back in line with each other so that the abscesses heal properly.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses arise, let him leave them for a day until the abscesses are soothed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then reset it evenly as you can lightly and gently, and know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restoration of that one where there are wounds; then release it, as appropriate afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, it is split into .2 parts, if it is in the hand or foot, or in your hand if it is a small member, or with .2 strings, or with one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, they are reset by all means in their places as you can, and be careful that your action does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust the two heads of the bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	Feel it with your hand to see if it is not in the right position; then adjust it properly and do not strain or press too hard as those do who cause hot abscesses and contraction of the limb through their treatment, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the bone is in place, then instruct the patient to be careful not to move it, whether awake or asleep, turning over in bed, or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure that the limb is secure so that there is no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain at all, it is not yet ready, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and beware that it be set straight, so that no crookedness comes to it when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members vary in size, shape, and form.Les quels conviennent a l’un et ne conviennent pas a l’autrier;
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, like arms and fingers and the like: so one must wrap them in soft, thin linen.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, like thighs and legs: these must be wrapped with wide, strong linen, for the wide linen encloses the entire large limb, and it compresses all parts evenly so that there is no pressure.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wind around it light bandages, three or four turns depending on the limb, and tighten your hand a little at every turn of the bandage, then go above the dislocation and tighten less so that the dislocation is drawn out a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage little by little as you apply it to most of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap around again directly over the dislocated area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the underside of the fracture, and hold it gently, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first hour above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the ligatures, pieces of linen or bandages, so that it is all even; then bind it all tightly with a bandage above, and then put your splints in well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something hot to relieve the abscess, and to reduce the swelling; leave it like that for a few days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then hold over your splints, and they should be made from half a length of cane resined, or from wood that is used for making chisels, or from palm tree branches, and they should be shaped like this:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary for the star that one places on the break to be a little larger and broader than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and as long as it is convenient for the member, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten around the stars just as you did at first, then tie it tightly, just as you did before on the break;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the tighter it is, the better; and the thread should be medium thickness, not too thick or too thin, and made of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their knots with linen threads that are twisted unevenly, and this is a great error, for the knot cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have between each eye less than two threads' thickness.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is raw under the eyes of the stars after the straining in their healthy state, then place underneath them lint or woolen rags so that it does not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture and the skin is broken, I will describe its treatment below.Car li grant maladous que l’on dit estre de la piere ne sont pas touz si de la piere; mes de la briseure qui adont la piere, et del chié qui de la briseure adont la plaie; si est li granz maux, et la grant piere ne se peut guérir si l’on n’estranche la piere.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to dislocate all broken limbs on the first day.Car li maux adont les membres par la briseure, et la piere que adont la plaie, il covient li premier jor estraindre li maux de la piere, et le second jor esguarer li maux del chié; car il ne doit guérir li maux de la piere li premier jor, mes li autrez joures.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	Because when the member is great, it should not be put in a splint for more than five or seven days, or more according to the security of the hot abscess;
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and here is the way of the ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations and twisting: you take flour that is held on the walls of the mill, and confit it with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture in many dispositions, especially in women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take 3 grains of barley and ladani and ennule and asafetida and gum arabic and mastic, each 10 grains; myrrh and aloes, each 5 grains; alechil 8 grains; and make them into powder, and mix them with plenty of egg; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plaster that is useful for twisting: take mastic and viscum album, each 10 grains; myrrh and aloes, each 8 grains; acacia 6 grains; Armenian bole 10 grains, and grind well, and confit with water or plenty of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another method of poultice for joints and bones dislocated from their sockets, and to soothe the resulting pain, and to treat fractures: take new lamb's wool, moisten it in vinegar and oil, and apply it to the affected area. These poultices do not promote healing, but they are good for soothing hot abscesses and alleviating pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of poultice that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and dead nettle leaves, crush them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another method of poultice for healing broken bones and reducing swelling from an abscess. Take marshmallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and wheat flour, one part each; crush and cook in wine. If the patient is feverish, cook in coriander water or water.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another method of stronger poultice when a tough abscess comes to the healing of the member. Take marshmallow root, flax seed, borage, melilot, and cow's foot, and violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; crush and cook in salted water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the member and its comfort.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hypocrites says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to heal it other than a ointment made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen says one should put on the broken member, to heal, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another type of ointment that is good for injury and pain: take mugwort and shaved human hair, or bird feathers, and bee wax, and mix them together, and grind them up, and make an ointment from it and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move the bone from its place; if not loosen it by hand for several days:
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching comes in the area, or swelling, lack of rest, then hurry and loosen it, and remove the ointment immediately; and take light cloth, and sponge of sea moistened, and dip in water, and wipe off the area until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the member rest for an hour, then put on clean linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it up in a bandage until you are sure there is no hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And soothe the inflammation of the member, and relieve the pain, then restart the gentle binding, and a little ointment, and do not bind it so tightly as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that there is heat and redness and pain and swelling still remaining in the body, and you need ointment and binding, then restart it, just as you did at first.Et se tu vois que li membre est sane et apaisie, si le tiens en repos et en legier cheis, et ne le deffait mie tant qu’il ne soit tout sanz dolor; et tu tiens li membre ou il doit estre, si com tu avies fait premierement.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if the limb does not improve with what we have said, do not remove the splint for three, four, five, or seven days, and sometimes leave it for twenty days, depending on how well the fracture is healing and how close the bone is to the skin.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then keep it restrained more than before, and the meat will grow larger, as I have said before. And if you see the area drier than it should be, know that no healing can take place there.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Soak the area in warm water when you remove the splint, and do this every third day, and loosen the bandage a little each time.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	Through this work, the limb will heal, and gently shorten what the foolish wound has made long; this is evil, and it is a cowardly work, and I see nothing good in it except to let it rest and work on it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many types of fractures, with diverse appearances, and the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are fractures caused by the impact of a sword, breaking the bone all the way to the sinus cavity underneath the bone, as with an axe or a staff; this type of fracture is called a "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures are great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is concussion accompanied by swelling, or fracture, or a blow from a stone, or falling on a stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture penetrating to the membrane just under the bone, or on top of the bone; and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as thinly as a hair, and the fracture is small, then this type of fracture is called 'capillare'.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by being hit with a stone, or by falling, or by a similar object, and it causes the bone to break and enter inside, and the location is splintered like how blacksmiths split iron on an anvil; in this case, the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have moist bones at their head, like the skull of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are dislodged, as with bones; I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we should know all types of fractures through examination, and through the corrupt flesh that is on top of it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one uncovers the bone and rubs it gently, then the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, pay attention to any bad signs of illness, and if you see any harmful incidents, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, seizures, feverish shivering, eyes bulging and turning red, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any shocking incidents and you expect a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the patient first comes to you and it is winter, then you should remove the splint before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the spring, then you should hasten to remove the splint before the seventh day so that the flesh underneath the bone does not rot and cause the incidents we have described.The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone reaches just to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the broken part thus: and it is that you grip the head of the wounded man, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and over the wound more gently than you can,
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if blood flows out when uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then help as it is suitable, and it is that you fill the wound with moist bandages in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and there is no more blood flow; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done according to 2 methods of work: one method is that you cut with a sharp knife directly in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then put another cut larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse tools, some narrow and others wide, and are pointed, and made of iron; and work gently so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, you must pierce it around, so that you administer tools with chisels, not deeper than to penetrate through the bone of the skull, and it should have above the point a rim or .i. circle, which does not let the point pass through the bone; and you should have several of these, so that each one comes in its place in the thickness of the bone, so that you have chisels for all skulls; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of chisels:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to put .i. chisel on the bone, and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the chisel elsewhere a little later, and thus do all around, then cope with the incisions the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this most subtly and gently, as we have said, so that you draw out the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have, such as tweezers, pincers; and beware of touching the brain or the membrane.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and drawn out the bone, it is necessary to cut away the membrane which is left on the bone with some instrument like an incision, but it must be more flexible and sharper than the other incision;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains in the small bones or any scales, then gently remove them with instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is safer; and he praises it highly, and his words are as follows:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must expose a part of the bone where the open fracture is located; then, once that part is exposed, place under the head of this lens-shaped instrument, of which this is the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side, but the cutting edge is towards the bone; then strike gently with a small mallet upon it, so that you slightly chip away at the bone all around, taking care to avoid the membrane below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is dislocated to the bone, then the bone should be put back into place gently, for one puts the bone back into place without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is only cut slightly on top, and there are small pieces, then you should smooth that roughness, and remove the scales with a very thin razor, of which you should have various quantities, in order to apply the most suitable one in each place, according to the action and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Take first a large razor, and then a thinner one, and do not cease doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hairline fractures and delicate breaks, you should apply treatment according to their nature; and this is something that is not laid out for one who has dedicated his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the ulcer is exposed, then you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it over the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another double-folded cloth in two or three layers, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as gently as you can so that you do not put any pressure on the ulcer. Then apply a bandage over it, and do not tighten it more than is necessary to hold it in place.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	Let it remain like this for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed. Then remove the bandage and treat the wound with medications such as lily roots, and flour made from beans, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things. Make a powder from these ingredients and apply it to the wound, then administer additional medications without biting the area;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and ensure that the wound is clean and free of any foreign objects, as when a bandage is applied over the brain's membrane, it can become irritated and inflamed, causing great harm to the patient. When something biting is placed on the ulcer and then covered, it will cause irritation from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if no ill accident comes to the patient, as we have said, for it is certain without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that one has applied, since such power it has, then you must take some honey and three parts rose oil and mix it into a paste with a cloth, and place it on the ulcer;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the jaw above are broken, either by themselves or together, for they are two bones; and below is cartilage, which does not break but only bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	If one of the two parts is broken, then you must stick your little finger or needle into the wound and place the break inside your index finger, and pull it out with force, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nail, and cannot come to the place of the finger, then you must put it equally at the top of a piece of wood, rather thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then do the same, and be quick to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is healed, then attach to the head of the tent made of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you attach another from another part, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the openings of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some say that one should soak the tents in butter, and change them every day. It does not seem good to me, but they should be soaked in egg white and mill powder; then leave the tent until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes they attach goose feathers instead of tents, and wrap it in a silk cloth, and keep the fracture still, and the patient breathes through it; do as you like.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if painful abscesses come in the nose while you are working on it, then apply cerot or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little dyer's alkanet.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if they do not come, then apply a plaster with force, made from flour of salsify, and powdered incense, confited with egg white, then apply it gently on swabs, without binding the nose.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract them with appropriate instruments for this purpose, then clean the wound and stop the bleeding with healing, soothing plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents and apply a pack of plasters, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the dislocation of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below and there is no wound in evidence, and only the joint is dislocated without fracture, and not broken in two, so that it is bent inside, one can perceive this easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the dislocation is on the right side, you should insert your right index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if it is on the left side, insert the right index finger and gently push the joint back into place with the other hand, keeping it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the dislocation of the jaw is dislocated to one side, one should administer an extension of two parts, so that it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement in the teeth, or a fracture, then bind them with a gold or silver wire, or silk; then apply cerate to the broken mandible, and place a double drape over it; and place a large, well-made splint, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it in place as tightly as possible; and instruct the patient to rest, and eat soft foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the jaw is changing shape, then loosen it on the third day, and then put it back into place again; and apply ointment over it, made of powdered millstone with egg white or flour, after you have removed the cerate; and place a thin layer of lamb's wool over the ointment, and if the jaw is not healing, and its condition remains unchanged, leave it as long as necessary until it heals, sometimes within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a hot abscess comes, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine it to see if any piece of bone has been displaced; then reset it with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and nothing remains inside, then stitch the wound, if it is wide, and place upon it suitable poultices to promote healing, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the armpit
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The armpit may break in many ways towards the shoulder, and there are three types of breaks: it may be broken and displaced in two places with pieces, which is the easiest to heal; or it may be broken with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when there is no wound in the fracture, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the broken collarbone; and the other stretches the neck towards the part; then put the break equal in your hands, so that it has neither appearance nor swelling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round piece of cloth, or of woolen cloth, and let it be thick according to your need; and they lift and loosen the collarbone, and hold the cloth in your hand, so that you make the break even, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the collarbone out of its socket because it is deeply embedded, then the patient should lie on his back, and put under the shoulder a small pillow, and the ministers press the shoulder down, until the bone of the collarbone is raised up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then grasp the break with your hands, and if you find it split, then you must split it open; and gently pull out the pieces, and if the bone cannot join because of any swelling, then use this instrument to ward off the skin:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	it resembles a spoon, and is not flat, and should be as wide as it needs to be according to the size of the bone and the extent of the work; and it has two ends, as you can see, and one is wide and the other narrow, as is the path of the wound that you made when treating the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the opening is small, or if you doubt a hot abscess, then pack the wound with lint and bandages according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, then moisten a piece of linen in rosemary oil and garlic and wine, and place it over the wound.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The splitting of the bone, when there is no wound or incision, is that you place on the bone a poultice made from milldust and egg white, and place light bandages over it, and put a splint under the shoulder, if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then put a double cloth on cotton pads and anoint it; then take a thin steel rod three fingers in width and length, and wind it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs down;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and place the rod on the fracture, and wind the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy armpit, and under the sore armpit; and reset it in each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place properly, and you see clearly that the rod does not move on top of the broken bone, then reward it every day, and when the ligature loosens, restrain it again;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and have the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder; then loosen the fracture of the collarbone by raising the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it if no evil accident occurs, until twenty days have passed;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then renew the anointing if you see that he needs it, and restrain and leave him like this until he is healed; and she is healed at most in twenty-eight days, and less with some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Sometimes the shoulder dislocates or widens in its socket, and it is not set right except by touch; then set it according to the pattern of the dislocation, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way you can; then place ground flour from a mill with egg white, and light bandages, and place on top a double piece of cloth; then place on top a large and thin board, one hand’s breadth wider than the shoulder, and if underneath the board there is any swelling on the shoulder, then use that swelling to pad the board evenly; and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and each time it softens, bind it again, and adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number of days is complete, then unbind him, and be sure, for it is not a bone that can be set easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and not under the heart, then cut it off, and the bone, and do as we have said in the dislocation of the shoulder to soothe the hot abscess.Et se l’os tent desoz lou keur, et non pas avant, si fent de la maniere que nos avon dit; et se li espaule ne puet estre restoures, si covient li faire une chire ou une fente en l’espaule selonc la brisure, et le mettre dedens, et puis le brancher selonc la forme naturale, et le brancher fermement, et le deslie; et se li espaule fuert plus largement del keur qu’il ne devoit estre, si covient li faire une chire en l’espaule adons de la fente, si que li espaule siet igalment, et li faire brancher fermement, et le deslie; car il ne pouet estre restouree.
de la brisure dou pis	of the dislocation of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The thigh is sometimes broken in the middle, but that rarely happens; it more often breaks at the top. And when it is broken in the middle, it tilts downward, and the patient experiences great pain, and there is a lack of movement, and he feels cold all over, and may vomit blood, and the hair turns grey in the broken bone, and he feels great discomfort.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is for the patient to lie on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders, then press his shoulders together, and bring the ribs closer together with his hands, and carefully adjust the bone to its proper position; then apply plasters and poultices over the fracture site using a delicate salt or some other lightweight substance, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it onto the broken bone so that it does not move; and re-wrap the ligament around the back, and tighten it gently, and check every hour if it has softened, and if so, tighten it; and if it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or an abscess, then do so quickly, loosen the ligament, remove the plaster, and treat according to the nature of the condition; then re-apply the plaster and tighten until healed.
de la brisure des costes	[treatment for a broken rib]
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that rib fractures occur only in the thick part near the back, and in the front near the chest, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and it feels good when pressed on both sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is such that you put the fracture in its proper place, just as it should be. And then apply the plaster and bind it with a bandage if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is bent inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, as with pleurisy, because the bone pricks the lung; and it also causes shortness of breath and vomiting a great quantity of blood, and it is a very serious condition, and the ancient physicians placed great importance on it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that one should administer foods that swell the belly in order to push the fracture out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not agree that hot abscesses will not form if they have not formed already.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if he has come, then heal him.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that one should apply cups to the area to draw out fluid, and this is reasonable; however, there is a risk that the cups might attract excess fluids due to the weakness of the tissue.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that one should cover the area with warm, moist wool, and place tents between the ribs to create equal pressure all around, then it is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that points towards the wound, and there is doubt in the patient, then one should split above the location of the broken rib, and one should place underneath .i. instrument to ward off the siphacus; and then one must cut the bone and pull gently, and then sew the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is healed. And if hot abscesses come, one should place moistened cloths in rose oil on top of the wound; and while treating the area where the abscess should be, one should lie carefully on their side where they should, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the break in the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the neck bones, and it can bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, take note if their hands are soft, swollen, and dead-looking, and if they cannot move or straighten them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that in most cases, it is a deadly disposition, and if they can move their hands and feel the pain when you stretch or press on them, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be healed if proper care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If a similar thing happens to the spine in the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, then examine whether his feet are swollen, and see if the accidents are there which are in the hands, and in the back there is flatulence and urination without wanting it; and when he is laid on his stomach, there is urination without wanting it. And when he is laid on his back and wants to sit up, he cannot. Know that it is deadly: so do not labor at all in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the case is less serious.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply a hot poultice to the spine if there is an abscess, or rose oil, or the yolk of a new egg, until it is soothed; then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and he must not sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, it must be covered with a bandage; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a single stitch, then treat it with ointment in a bandage, until it is healed; and if there is broken bone, which is called the "bone of the cow", grab your left-hand little finger with your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage it on, if you need to; then bind it, and if there is exposed bone, sew it up, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It occasionally happens that the hip bone is fractured, and if it does, there will be some lessening at the top; and they hurt for a long time, and decline towards the sides, and the patient feels pain in the area, and there is swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, so that you are on the break; and know which end of the bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is at the top only, then put it back in place, so that it is in its natural shape.Et s’il est au chief et a li parmain, si met cele qui es a li parmain a sa natureil figure, tant qu’ele soit au chief; et s’il est a li parmain soulement, si met cele qui est al chief a sa natureil figure, tant qu’ele soit a li parmain.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then let the patient lie on his stomach, so that the restoration of the break is prepared for him.Et s’il est dou lonc et decline au pardedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son costé tant que cele brisure te soit aparillie.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then apply the ointment, and then place a wooden or leather splint on top, and hold the fracture steady so that it does not move; and apply the area below the ribs, until the color is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if painful abscesses arise, do not touch them until the painful abscesses are soothed, and apply what we have previously mentioned; then return to the restoration, and hold it as it should be, if there is no bad incident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The acromioclavicular joint is what is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of two methods. One method is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Tie both ends of the stick with two strings, and bend them upward, and press the patient down on a seat; then pour the broken arm over the stick, so that it comes to rest at the bottom, and press one curve of the stick inwards, and then bend it downward over some heavy object or by the minister extending it downward; then place the broken joint together in alignment with his hands, until the fracture returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his armpit and ties his hand to his neck; then command two ministers, one to hold what is above the fracture with his hands, and the other below to hold tight from underneath with one string, each pulling their respective ends.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tighten one string below the fracture and one above it, and extend each minister to their part. And if the fracture is closer to the head of the shoulder, then you should put a light string underneath the base of the shoulder, and another towards the collarbone, under the fracture; and also if the fracture is towards the collarbone, then a light string should be placed lightly without effort, so that the fracture is aligned with its proper position, and then extend equally from both sides, as it should be, and tighten it if necessary.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a hot abscess comes, do not drain it until the 7th day, and put soft linen in ash and rose oil on the hot abscess until the hot abscess is soothed; then drain it, and the way to drain it is to put the ointment on the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the cloth, and drain on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its place, unless something moves it, or if the bone is moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone will move, use splints, and put on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have between each splint 1 digit of space, and let each splint be as wide as it passes the break by 3 digits on each side; then drain over the splints, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the break, more strongly and less in moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the splints and the drainage, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it ligature until the 7th day, as we have said; then look at the ligature every 3 days, so that itching or swelling does not come to the site, or the pus cannot come to the member because it is too tight. Then loosen it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not loosen it for three days or more; let the patient sleep on his back, and have his hands on his stomach; and place underneath the shoulder a plain woolen cushion of equal thickness, and every hour during the day or night, check that the broken member does not move or the ligature become slack; then treat him with medicine and give him the food we mentioned earlier, so that the food is subtle at first and becomes thicker as he starts to recover. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days; then one should loosen it and administer baths and ointment treatments to encourage healing. And if the dislocation is severe and closed up, it should remain loose for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "ulna" and the "radius." The ulna is smaller and located closer to the armpit, while the radius is larger and situated below the small bone. Sometimes only the large bone breaks, sometimes only the small one, and sometimes both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When small bones are broken, their restoration and healing are easy; but when large bones are broken, the healing is difficult and more painful than when they are broken together. If only a small bone is broken, it should be gently extended and set straight.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is a large bone, it must be pulled harder; and he should lie on his back, with his hand highest of all, and his small fingers lowest of all, and the patient should be crossed over himself, and a cushion in front of him, so that he suffers no strain. Then the minister should extend his upper arm to the part below his hand, or to one side, and another minister to the other above. And then let the surgeon set it straight according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, let each be placed in its own position, and if any are displaced, hold the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make an incision on the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in a particular chapter; let the cure be taken from there.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if, at the beginning of the healing, hot abscesses arise, then apply a bandage of cerote made from rose oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; and bind a bandage over it gently, so that the hot abscesses are soothed. Then remove the cerote, and apply the plaster of mill-powder with an egg, then put on the splints, and let the splint for the fracture be larger and stronger than the others; and know that there should be six splints on the arm in various positions: whether the fracture is in one bone or two; and tighten more over the fracture than anywhere else, and always loosen it a little as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the bandages over the fracture be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the string, with which he is bound, be made of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. Then examine the limb and the binding after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes on the limb, then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itching is soothed; and let the limb rest and not be bound tightly. Then restart the binding, and if the ligature has loosened and the bone is displaced, or anything else amiss, then correct it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you perceive that the nutrients cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, then you must loosen it a little and leave it like that for several days, until the nutrients flow to it, and then tighten it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of the things we have said come to the patient, do not loosen it until 20 days. or around, then let him hold his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and guard against movement and stirring, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 30 days, or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers there are few fractures, and they come only with great force many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then the patient should sit upright and straight in front of him equally; then put his hand on the stretched towel, and stretch the minister the broken bones, and put them even ministerially, so that they are well joined; and put the plaster and the poultices, if abscesses do not come, then put a cast according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in 1 linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the peritoneum around the abdomen of the plant, make a sphere of fabrics, and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken plant; then hold it with a long strip of fabric, and let the pad be of woolen cloth as large as the palm of your hand, and hold it, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the furrow, you should put a pad on top and another underneath the plant, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture is in one of the fingers, whether it's the thumb, hold it straight and even as it should be; then hold it with the plant, and if you see, put a small straight pad to raise the fracture, and do not move it; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the index or any other, hold it even, and tie it with the finger next to it; either tie them all together while holding it, which is better, or put a pad on top, as in the thumb; take care in the restoration and in the application of hot abscesses, and treat those that occur, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The thigh bone is often broken, and one can see this when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration is with one ligature above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each ligature to its part equally; and that is when the fracture is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one ligature should be towards the buttock, and the other ligature below the fracture. And likewise, if it is near the knee, then the ligature should be past the knee, and the extension downward; then the surgeon puts the bone equal to its natural position with his two hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then he applies the poultice and the ligature, unless abscesses come from it.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let him calm down and then return to your work and treatment; the ligature is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary to wrap around the fracture with a hard bandage folded in two or three layers, and then tie it tightly, so that only the excess material hangs down. Then, turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the shin, and pass a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, so that one end of the thread comes out at the top; then, turn the bandage back over the leg and thigh, and place splints on the fracture, and place one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the thigh with soft rags to make the binding even, and then begin to tie the binding firmly in three or four places around the fracture. The more you go up from the fracture, the looser the binding should be; then take hold of the two ends of the thread that you passed through, and tie the three splints that are on top, and then go back down to the end of the thread, until you reach below the foot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, and then leave it thus, until no abscess or swelling or similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes, then loosen it, and treat what comes out of it as we have said many times before; and if there is a bone fragment protruding, then one must remove it if possible; and if not, then one must split the area and draw it out, and treat the wound as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken like this when splints are put on, as in the shoulder and arm; nonetheless, the malady is not cured by this treatment.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the hip is restored within one day, or a little less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the joint of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breaking, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it is only a slit, or one hole, and it happens in all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put it back into place as it was before, with its bones aligned so that they can be set; then apply the plaster, and if necessary, use a round splint, and bind it as it should be, then follow all the instructions we have given for other fractures, such as hot abscess and similar conditions; then treat each accident as appropriate, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	You know that there are two bones in the leg; one is called the "mustel" and the other the "foscile." All fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore their treatment is the same, as are all the operations.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns completely inside out.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if only the small bones are broken, then it turns forward.And if the shinbone is broken, it turns backward. And if the thighbone is broken, it turns outward. And if both are broken, it turns inside out.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it goes underneath. Then bring about extension, and make it equal, and bind the splints equally; but nevertheless, if the fracture is ugly, and there are several pieces, then let the extension be lesser and more gentle; and alleviate according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints which support the leg on both sides, and which are as long as the leg from the knee down to below; then wrap two bands around them, one above and one below, and tie the middle also, and at this time the leg will not decline to the right or left, and so it is well; and some administer a board as long as the leg, and it is of wood, and they place the leg upon it to prevent movement, and properly they do this in the fracture where there is pain; and move the leg each day to see if there is any hot abscess or other accident; and treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at times there is a fracture of the bones of the foot and of the two bones, and there is only bruising in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of the foot are broken, and you see the bones sticking out above one another, then put that foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised up; then press them until they return to their places. Then put the ointment and bandages on top, and place a small wooden board with two smooth sides underneath the belly of the foot, and then bind it tightly to the foot in a suitable manner, and then wrap clothes around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And after three or four days have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones healed, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, then set them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint according to the length of the toe, and let it be a little wider, then place underneath the foot that board which I have mentioned, and tighten it appropriately; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place on top of each toe a splint according to its size, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the board underneath the foot; and let the top of the board press firmly against the belly of the foot.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have already said; and treat each case as it should be treated.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the finger
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's bone is broken, make her sit up and lean forward, then hold her from behind. Fill the vagina with cotton and insert a stone as big as an egg; then have the woman stand up and loosen her back little by little, whereupon the cotton will come out along with the stone, bringing the broken bone with it. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it. Do this for seven days, and the fracture will be healed. If you wish, take a sheep's bladder, tie a straw to the opening, and fill the bladder with air by blowing into the straw until it is inflated inside; the vagina will then pull the broken bone back into place. Fill it with cotton and leave it for several days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the finger is broken in a man or woman, restore it as we have said for the hip bone; these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves to this study with attention and read my book. For in many cases, they indicate the right path to restoration: listen then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	When the penis is broken, take a goose's gullet and insert it into the penis; then wrap it tightly with cloth and leave it for three days or so, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as in the thigh or shoulder or similar, to be bled immediately, so that the bleeding we have described bears witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound bleeds, then apply vitriol again, if you have nothing else; then restart reducing the fracture in that same hour or day, if no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, then leave the reduction until the next day, as long as the abscesses are soothed; and do not touch them on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered chest, you should gently put it in place with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not apparent to you to make it equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which is seven or eight inches long, and its width depends on the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor needs to hold it with three or four fingers, depending on what he needs in each case of broken bone; and it should be smooth and slightly bent, so that it does not fold under pressure on the affected member during your work, and it should be thick at the front and wider from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "splint," so that the curved shoulder should be placed on the visible top of the bone; and bend it once, as far as it goes back, and make it equal on both sides. And if the fracture is delicate, and the instrument cannot grip the bone well, then you should cut the top of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it firmly.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, such as an incisor or scissor, according to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone of sharpness and tiny shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do this until it is in its place, then moisten a cloth with black wine vinegar, and apply it clean if it is dirty; do not put cerate or anything else on the wound so that pus and corruption may come; then administer poultices when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the size of the wound; be very careful that the wound is not constricted by the binding. And many times the foolish have done this, and have brought about death or corrosion on the patient; and let the binding be softer and more supple than other bindings.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is large or deep, and you doubt that harm may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the area, then do not put poultices on it; but wrap around the wound, instead of poultices, hard cloths, and tie them. And when you see after a day or two pus forming at the wound, remove what you put on top to all the way to the wine, and apply ointment that heals wounds, such as tetrafarmaçon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is sewn up and healing.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And one must prepare the limbs in such a way that the bowstring runs smoothly and lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they go many days without healing, and it cannot be reset but keeps dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must probe the wound with a needle, and remove all the dislodged bone fragments that are causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula or other form of corruption develops, then one must treat it according to what he said in the chapter earlier. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as with the thigh or shoulder bone, and similar large bones, do not touch it, for many die from it; but leave it be until it can heal; perhaps after 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruises that come over the weld
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often come after the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the shape of the limb; and by chance the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the swelling is fresh: have the physician administer astringent medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others; crush one of these substances, or all together, and cook them in wine, egg white, or garlic; apply it to the wound as a poultice, and bind it on tightly for several days; then remove it and start another, until the nodule is removed. Or you can press it hard against a well-shaped piece of plaster; for the properties of plaster are such that it removes all inflammation from the limbs; if the nodule has turned to hardness like stone, and needs to be cut out, then scrape it away, and reveal the excess growth beneath; or have it removed by some scraper until it is gone and healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb that is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is healed and the limb remains weak and slender, it happens for many reasons: one reason is that it was bound too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, and the nourishment could not reach the limb; or because of excess swelling; or because of excessive movement, not at the right time; or because there is little blood in his body, and so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and soften the body, so that the blood is multiplied within him; and administer a bath to him, and give him joy and relaxation; then apply pitch to the limb, so that the pitch attracts to it greatly, and moisten often with warm water, so that the attraction runs into the limb; and restore it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the limb bent after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are bent after restoration, and the broken bones appear, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function; do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm comes from them, and even death; nevertheless, if the dislocations and torments are fresh, they should be moistened with warm water, or herbs that soften are cooked, such as leaves of marshmallow, and roots, and melilot, and similar medicines that soften the swelling; and you make a soft plaster, such as diaquilon well made, and you take the mucilage of marshmallow, and confit it with suet or fat of lamb, and make a plaster on it; or you take ripe figs, and crush them with colon dung, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the dislocation is released by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands; and movement must be encouraged in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is enlightened and hardened, like stone, and needs to be removed with iron, then it must be cut into subtly and lightly, up to the bone; and put poultice and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in someone, one should immediately try to reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the area swells and if one tries to reset it, it may cause pain. So one must not move it when it is swollen, for this can often bring on a fever and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient bleed, then leave it until the abscesses are drained; then apply hot water and oil to the affected member, then reset it gently and treat each part as it comes into its proper place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the mandibles
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Then the mandibles become dislocated and both dislocations are according to two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and made pliable, or they are completely dislocated and hang down towards the feet, and saliva flows from his mouth which he cannot hold in, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped around by speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it will return to its proper place through many remedies.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and fully developed, then you must reset it quickly and not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And in such a way that the minister holds the head of the patient, and puts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other fingers be relaxed, in order to apply pressure evenly. And instruct the patient to soften and move their mandibles from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And she keeps an even pace until she returns to her place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the jaw is dislocated, especially if both jaws are affected, apply hot water and oil, and gently manipulate them until they return to their proper position; do not use force in this manipulation, as we have already instructed.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are returned to their proper position and the mouth of the patient is closed well without softening, then place upon it wet cloths dipped in rose oil and wax, then bind it gently with soft ligatures.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, and let him eat soft foods only, until the pain subsides and the jaws are mended.And if there is any swelling in the face, apply a poultice of roasted herbs to the affected area, and change it frequently until the swelling goes down.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat what he wants easily, and do not try to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the mandible is well healed and cleaned.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be put back in place within an hour, and are not converted to their places, then fever and usual sores come, and by chance, intestinal problems, and by chance, vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is destructive; and many times, the person to whom it happens dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceless cannot dislodge the constriction within the continuance of it and of the foot, and is dislodged sometimes by force, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and compress it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the shoulder which is towards the neck cannot be dislodged; if it can be, and if it is dislodged sometimes, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and compress it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And likewise is returned the shoulder blade when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	You should know that the shoulder may be dislocated in three ways: one is at the part of the armpit below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and it may happen to dislocate from above, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the armpit, especially in those who are thin; in those who are fat, it dislocates slowly and goes back in slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they get a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must test it until you are certain, and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And you will recognize a dislocation when it is downward toward the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	And you will find a pit at the top of the shoulder, and under the armpit at the shoulder joint, it feels like an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	And also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, for you can clearly see it by feeling it;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to fix when it is new, or when the child is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is for the assistant to lift the affected hand up, then place their fingers under the shoulder, and lift the joint forcefully upwards into position; while the assistant lifts the hand and extends it upward, then lowers it back down; this will bring quick relief.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not work as we have described within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and anointed with softening and soothing ointments, such as a decoction of alfalfa, fenugreek, and sweet clover in water, and then bandaged.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be laid on their back, and a soft but not too soft or hard pillow placed under the shoulder, then the assistant places their heel on the pillow, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and pulls the affected hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister dyes the head of the disease, so that it does not move down; the shoulder comes back right away, and if you see that he dislocates according to this way.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make present a man who is bigger than the patient; and he stands straight towards the shoulder, and pushes his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lifts the armpit upward, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister pulls the hand of the patient downward toward the belly. And if the patient is too light, they can hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation returns right away.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And they dislocate it also in another way: and one fixes a long peg in the ground, so that the head is as wide as a pencil, and neither too big nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then let him be put under the patient, but with a soft cloth above, and the patient standing upright; then let his hand be stretched out on the other side, and the joint will return to its place gradually.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return due to all these things we have said, then perform this cure: take a brand two yards long and four fingers wide, with its tip bent for easy insertion under the shoulder-blade, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind it with soft cloth above the shoulder-blade so that the shoulder-blade does not hurt the patient; then put it under the shoulder of the patient, and stretch his arm out along the length of the brand, and bind the shoulder to the brand, and the arm at the tip of the hand; then let the arm hang down, and the body lean to the other side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however it may be, you must put under the shoulder-blade a woolen ball the same size, then apply the prepared ointment of flour-mill powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then stretch it under the shoulder-blade gently, and return the bandage over the ointment, and embrace the hand at his neck, and let the arm remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, until the member is healed, for he will heal faster; and then eat more after five or seven days, and move him; and if he is stiff and not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has accumulated, or for any other reason, then you must administer cautery to three openings, as described in the chapter on cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and the joint still dislocates after seven days, and the shoulder cannot be raised upstream, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be firmly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are towards the bottom, at the breasts, or behind, are made by pushing and stretching with the hands, and one should treat them until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, there is pain in the limb, and with movement, use the bath many times for the patient until the pain goes away and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	about the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You should know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated by pins, and it returns by pins; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not reset, for one can see and feel it well, and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the sick shoulder with the healthy one, you can see it clearly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it when the abscess has come out, for if the abscess comes out, then it is painful to reset it; and by chance it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is in the back; so it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and death may result.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it can be reset, that you extend his hand with your two hands; and let his arms be spread out, and his hands bent according to the joint, inside and outside and around, and press the joint at his wrists together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he bends his hand toward his hand, and presses from the root of the palm the joint that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it will not return to its place, then provide strong extension; and let one minister extend the arm, and the other minister hold it, so that he does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then you have wrapped a long and wide cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he sees the joint of his hand, he lubes it with oil to loosen the joint, then bends the joint properly so that it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, he applies a dry poultice with egg white, and holds it firmly, and binds the arm to the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then releases it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, he removes the poultice and leaves it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, then restart the poultice and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels stiffness after the setting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and massage him well, and press until he is eased; place a fat snowball on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And when he sweats, gently rub the joint, then put on the bandage again, and then enter the bath; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you see that it is swollen, put moist cow dung heated with butter on it, and press it on; then it will return to its natural state.
li dislocation de la main	dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is healed, and its return is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place gently, in the same hour that it was dislocated, so that the joint is swollen or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remedy is that you place the affected hand on a table, and one minister stretches the hand, and another minister looks at it and puts it back in place, and then they bind it tightly so that it heals.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Nevertheless, you must make sure that it is in the right position; then place the patient's hand on a table with his palm facing upwards and his fingers extended.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient lie with his palm facing upwards on the table, and place the examiner's hand upon that part of the joint where the dislocation occurred. If it now goes back into place, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing poultices to the hot abscesses and leave it as it is without readjusting it.Et s’il est au coude ou a la jointe de la main, si li faildra que l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans et apostemes chaus; et si le laisse ensi sens rencomencier.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after several days, then the joint will remain crooked;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and does not harm the patient before the hand is weakened and cannot squeeze anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy except to squeeze with a cautery below the case, and by chance nothing else is worth it.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then squeeze and let go for .v. days, then loosen and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any swelling, then wet it with warm water and rub it until it is healed.Et s’il advoit que li nerfs fussent copez, si puet il estraindre par cauterie, et frotter li sembables plasters sus le leu qu’il fut copez .
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the handEt s’il advoit que li nerfs fussent copez, si puet il estraindre par cauterie, et frotter li sembables plasters sus le leu qu’il fut copez ..
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	At times they are dislocated on either side of the hand, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the underside.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then one should grip the finger, and pull the dislocated joint back into place, then hold the top of the finger and bend it towards the direction from which it was dislocated.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	And let it be for two days, and then put it back in place on the third day; and bind it as we said before, and loosen it during the day, and move it, and bind it at night; and do this frequently until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	And do the same if it is dislocated on the underside of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same if it is dislocated elsewhere.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade or neck is dislocated, there is no treatment, for death hastens the disease.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations jump without willingness, nor can they hold them in, and many times members are weakened, both arms or one arm and leg.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And often the shoulder blade moves in four parts; that which moves at the back is called "wryness":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	the cure is to determine whether the gout has come from childhood; if not, there is no cure or healing of it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient books describe many ways to cure it with great words, but they have not much benefit in all cases.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my understanding and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that gout which comes in the front toe has no cure or healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also the one that comes straight in both sides, and cannot be cured unless it comes properly from the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and there is that the patient be stretched out on his face in one equal place, and has a restraint under him so that he does not bleed.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	Then insert one brand in the head firmly into the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a string under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two ministers hold the strings, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two brands;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are well closed, the tinder as we have said, and the surgeon puts his palms on the spine until it is healed.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not heal with this treatment, take a table 3 yards long, and shave underneath the edge, and let the patient lie on his side, and put the end of the table under the spine, then place the middle of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And the surgeon puts his feet on the other end of the table and presses hard until it heals; and if you see that it happens in the turn which turns to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should insert 2 tinder sticks at the head of the patient's arm, and 2 more towards the feet, and have between each tinder stick, above and below, a palm's width of space.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and in each torch hole, there is a turn, and the torches are firmly in the ground, so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches there is a turning torch, over which the chains turn, and in two turns there are two small torches the size of a palm, for turning the turnstile;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the link that is among the wheels to the turnstile towards the head, and the other link towards the feet at the other turnstile, and each of the ministers turns his turnstile all along the chain, and the master puts the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on a drying plaster with an abundance of egg, and then the tow, and then the steel of a tablet three inches long, which purples the site of the hunchback and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a link, as we have said, and use the patient's subtle pain-relieving medicine until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes of the health in the end, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steel that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes one administers a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, so one must not have any presumptions about it: by chance it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You should know that only dislocations occur at the joints of the hip and shoulder, and not as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and mostly inside, and less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the affected leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the affected knee opens more than the healthy one, and the affected person cannot bend their knee over fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the place which is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of those who it afflicts are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those who it affects in front are that their leg is straight according to its length; nevertheless, they cannot bend their knee without pain, and if they want to walk, they cannot, and they retain their urine, and the veins swell, and when they walk, they walk over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of those whom it affects behind are that they cannot bend or straighten their knee, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are: if the dislocation is old and it persists according to its nature, then there is no treatment; and it must not be assumed that it will get better on its own.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocations, you should quickly return the joint to its place, and stretch it in and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will come back into place and require no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this way, you should prepare a strong bandage and stretch the leg hard with two hands, or tie it to the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another person stretches his hand above in such a way that he presses his hands under his armpits, then tighten a rope around the thigh; and someone else tightens a rope around his head;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and raise them upstream and downstream all at once, so that the patient is lifted off the ground all at once and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, that is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, one should apply treatment to the affected area. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, one should support the patient on their healthy side, then place the strap at the root of the thigh and the part below the armpit, then raise the strap towards the armpit and the breast;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then have another assistant grasp his arms and squeeze the large part of the dislocated thigh and extend it forcefully: it will return to its place immediately; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in the manner we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope under the two heels and over the two knees; let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it be hung from the top of a pole, about two arms' length from the ground; then command one assistant to hold the head of the thigh firmly, and another assistant hanging with the patient to hold the thigh firmly, for the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is healed, let the patient lie as we have said for one who has gout, and tie one bandage tightly around the affected leg and another around the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two pieces of wood, one at the head and one at the foot, then insert one piece of wood between the thighs at the affected side.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and lay moist bandages around it so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each limb towards him, and the assistant holds steady with his hand over the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it stays in place, that is good. If not, lay the patient on a table and press him as we said before, and turn his head towards the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg slowly, and according to what I have said; and have the assistant put his weight on the painful shoulder, then press with the other hand, and push the leg down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the back, it is not necessary to extend the affected side downward or lift it up, but it should be positioned as though the hip were dislocated backward, as we have said regarding lying on one's side.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it is on his face, and the bandage stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint on the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, apply the ointment, and hold it in place with a bandage, so that the hip does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and let him rest for 3 or 4 days, then release the bandage and apply the ointment again; if you see that they are even, then stretch it as before, and leave it for 3 days; then release the bandage and let him walk comfortably until the limb is healed.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	Knees are dislocated in three ways: that is, on the inside, on the outside, and behind; but they are not dislocated in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, you know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	And the restoration of all [dislocations] is that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and place his foot upon your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	Then take his knee in your palms, and pull it apart with your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he straightens his leg at the thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the plaster to it, and make the leg bend at the thigh, and tie them together tightly for three or four days, then loosen it; and do not let the patient walk until the limb is healed.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not healed, then administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes dislocated, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and tender to the touch at the site of the dislocation:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the movements should be gentle, and one must gently straighten out the affected limb when it is merely dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from everywhere, then you should have the patient sit upright and extend his affected limb .i. ministers forcefully by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand .ii. times, then extend it upwards and push the foot upwards firmly;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this three times as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it goes back in, that is good; if not, then do the operation again, for it will go back in.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot go back in like that, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a post firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap cloth around it so that he does not move;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then one minister pulls the thigh, and another extends the foot with his hands or with a rope, so that he ties it to the post;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister pulls equally, and the post is held firmly between the patient's thighs to hold him in place as he is stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then put mirrors evenly on the dislocation at his hands, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg down below, and the dislocation will return slowly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and pads on top, and straighten it firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are on the ankle behind, so that the ligatures are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it for 1 or 2 days, and if the ligature loosens, straighten it again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and the patient should go about their business within 4 days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that he will not relapse.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if painful abscesses arise, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	of the arms
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, one should stretch them gently without force, and this is a minor matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the lower back or feet, then you should have the patient lie flat on his back or on a table completely straight, and place your foot over the affected joint, then press firmly on your foot until it pops back into place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a board with two notches, then pull it tightly, and leave it for three days, then loosen it; and let him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one wishes to restore it, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presume in the curing, unless you are wise in the art and have used it a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and tardy, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things, apply a hot poultice to the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand if you see no hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then immediately return the limb to its place, so that the hot abscesses heal;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then minister hot poultices to the abscesses, and cure the wound, as it should be, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small broken bones, then set the bones, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is good for you according to your Creator, and for the saving of your weapons and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here ends the Roman of Physics
