O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical art with its contents and I have finished it by way of its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say, "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And for this reason the work by hand is well-treated in our region and is completely different from all others, so it has the science and the knowledge, and there is nothing left to be desired from the force of the hands but the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is distant.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	Or me seems that I will come to life again with the direction of this healer according to the way of exposure and statement and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and I will come together with the forms of the tools of cauterization, and of the other instruments of the work with the setting of the statement and preparation for him, as it is fit.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good masters of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who engages in this should master the science of anatomy, as Galileo says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and connections and separations of bones, and has knowledge of nerves and veins and the number of joints, and movement and resting veins, and the place of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this do I say that he will not be bitter with the food, and little by little with the work;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of the hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We will say to you in the introit of this book that he who is not aware of the things before said, let him guard so that he does not err and hurt men;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	So that I have often desired many of those who meddle in this science, and if they abandon themselves to this science and to their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scrofulous neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	because so much blood came out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I have seen another foolish man who treated a stone in the bladder of an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	so he took away a piece of the bladder with him, and the man died three days later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen a patient called for an operation, and saw the dislocation of the patient and the size of the stone; and if one operated on him, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I have seen another foolish man who took as his cure a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was an ulcer;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the foolish physician, out of ignorance, tightened the break on top of the ulcer with a very tight bandage, and left no salve on the wound, leaving it in this condition;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he ordered that he not remove it.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and causes delays so that the leg is all hidden and the foot and comes to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to remove the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I removed it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But all the ways in which he had corrupted that limb were already confirmed, and that member could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until all the members were lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder that would cause an abscess to become putrid and then inflame because of the evil of its nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For leprosy, when it is infected with melancholy humor, does not come to touch it except with iron in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And therefore, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, there are those in which there is danger in many situations.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each of the books of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For you must keep them so that the bad man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your weapons in harmony, and tackle your patients lightly but resolutely, and employ the better method, so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are healed;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave behind the incurable diseases of great illness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and keep your weapons from those who make you doubt, and believe that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien wrote some of his advice:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on a patient with a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	» I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicines, and the chapter order from the loins down to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the shapes of tools, and of the iron instruments for cauterizing, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter deals with the use of knives for cutting, suction cups for sucking, and vacuum for extracting matter from wounds, as well as the extraction of arrows and similar procedures.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and this is the order of the chapters and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter deals with the restoration of dislocations and torsions, and similar procedures.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and here are the forms of instruments from the beginning to the end.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I speak about the quality of aid and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid, and its harm, are the most distant word and subtle science and secret responses.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and from these words many wise men will speak, and agree with them.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	And I am satisfied with few words, because I shorten the long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that universal aid, in all parts where there is matter, except in two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	This is hot in nature, and dry by substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In hot and dry complexions together with substance, there is no one who does not say that cautery is a great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is of no value to a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the fire nature is hot, and must not be cured of a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he who says that cautery does great help to a hot and dry disease that comes about in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And all the ways, except those who have tried it and know by long use the treatment of fire, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the wonders and space of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	Of other complexions we have no fear, but of the cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them agree and are in harmony with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, sons, that fire cautery is more effective if it is applied to wounds that have already been treated, and it has much greater beneficial power than cauterization with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is wounded, and does not harm another member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	The burning medicines come from one member to another by removing them, and bring to the member painful diseases of great repair.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and by chance the disease occurs.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not cause it, if there is no surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And which I have found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the wisdom of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	And because I am sorry for the length of speech, for it does not please me to rob you of the secret which is hidden in fire, and the quality of the work, how he routs diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in his demonstration;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	and may you take it to heart.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be performed at the right time, and they should be prayed over.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by what comes after can be prevented by cauterizing.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and most often it is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot wait until the time when greater and faster harm might come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And do not think, young man, as they do,
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	because there is no returning from the disease that is healed by cauterization.
et il le dient ensi;	and it should be served in this way;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not the same as what they do; for cauterization is not like medicine that changes the appearance and dries up the humors that cause pain, nor does it have as quickly as medicine does, its power over its work and its dignity in its action.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And things that can be known are that the disease will never return according to the appearance of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and are gathered together in him the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not that cauterizes are administered into him where he has a little excess and moisture, so as to cauterize with thick for the pain, and similar things, and the part pain does not return again;
mais ce avient poc.	but this did not happen.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand because the cauterizes of medicine are called the derrians, and it is seen;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterizes are good after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the cauterizes of the derrians of medicine are good because when we administered ways of treatment in any disease and they did not work, then let us administer the cautery, and it is good.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cauterizing the derries is useful for whatever reason when we administer ways to treat various diseases and they do not work, so let us administer the cautery, and it will be useful; but it is not according to the intentions of the foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient ones said that the cautery of gold instruments is gentler than that of iron, and they did not say about the quality of gold and because of the high quality of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the fire cautery does not cause ulceration, but that is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cauterizations are better than iron, as they used to say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And whenever you heat a gold instrument, it is not the same as when it is coated with gold, and it quickly cools down;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if you heat it too much;
si font au feu;	so it does in the fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and so there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And so we use our fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For in this chapter on the head of the shoulder, order it so that the view is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	For this cautery with olive oil is for the head, and by reason of moisture and coldness on the head, and because of many humors that descend from the hair, and to the ears, and for many troubles and pain in the teeth and in the jaw, and most importantly for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and sodomy and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purged with a liquid medicine that softens the head (III or IV), according to what is appropriate for the virtue and the age and the habitude of the disease;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then make a hole in the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then take the fire and sit it between your hands, and put your hands on his back.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	After that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and then let your two fingers come together, and if it bleeds from the middle, heat the fire which is called 'olivaire', by which this form is made:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the mark of ink, and do it descending and drawing your hand back and forth again;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	and then release your hand, and look at the bone I sole little;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	And if you don't see it, begin again the fire as long as you see the bone, as I told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	After that, take a little thread, and put it wet and soft cotton inside, and place it on the mark, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	After me take cotton wet with butter.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave on until the heat is gone;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	After me treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healthy again.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And say to him who is old, that the longer the wound remains open, the more it will fester;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason one must act quickly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one must leave the fire cautery in place for so long that part of the bone is burned; and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it will heal.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And serve the other that he must be cauterized as long as it can be, and press so hard that the humor can come out of the bone as far as the women put in their thorns to get rid of the humor;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	After this, you must treat and support it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in any way, except that in some people who are prone to fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I must leave him alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	because the shoulder is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the shoulder of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more calm and quiet for me, and from this I operate in a orderly way to save.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old woman's pain at the top
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When all the head comes to great pain and lasts a long time, then the patient must use his herbs and pills which are called "coches", and head washing and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if on him the cauterization that we have just said is done, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the shoulder of the sick person is of strong nature, and he is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize him a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After making fire cautery on each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make fire cautery where it is called "vessel";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and put vials there;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and arrange your hand so that you do not see the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels too much pain in this fire cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and the fire cauteries of the horns should be thinner than those for which you make fire cautery on the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When sudden pain comes in part of the head up to the oil, and the patient is extended until the bone, and the shoulder has been cleansed with medicines that make one well, and all this does not help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then do fire cautery according to two ways, that is to say, of water medicine and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	To treat a medicine ague, if you squeeze an almond and scratch the skin but do not remove the flesh from the two shoulders, then make a temple where the pain is in some way that you can respond to the almond being removed from the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it has been responded to if the bandage and restraint are well done and left thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	then remove the bandage and treat with garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then put cotton dipped in butter on it as long as it can stand it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the garlic treatment until it is well;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that fire of some burning medicines that I have written or one-twelfth treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery so that it is this form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And is called "close" for this head is made in the form of a close or it has a small crook, and is middle to a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and set over the painful part, and hold your hand and turn the fire a little lighter, until half of the meat is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and leave your hand so that the artery does not burn, which will stop bleeding, and run with a great deal of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	Afterwards, put cotton in silk, and set over the part for three days.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then soak the cotton in milk and butter, and then treat the part with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery which is called "cultellare", do so at the tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a headache as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not profit from it, and see that the cautery which is called "cultellare" is blunted, then it is necessary to sharpen the cautery until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and so with a line of half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and strain it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come to the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and so with caution from the mandible that moves when it is bitten, and the root does not hurt except for the movement and spasms that come to the patient, and so with caution from the blood loss of the artery when it is cut, or if there is a great fear and uncertainty in those who do not know about this, and who are not students and have not experienced it;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work half done;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to strain blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you the line where it should be done in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that these cauterizations are not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the head as well as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapter of extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has II blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied fluid medications and other treatments that we have spoken of in the division, and the pain does not go away, then warm this poultice called "poins", and it is shaped like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around the two of them until it hurts in both, and move away a little from the root of the ear then because you have marked the place of the incision;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and there are ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After heal the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	The torture that must be healed by cautery is only good for those that move of fluidity, as we have said in the division of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make any cauterization as similarities come from hunger and dung of animals.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you heal this similarity of torture that moves of fluidity of hydros and of dung of mouth and of gargling, and this does not work, then it is convenient that you cauterize the disease with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and another a little way beyond the temple, and the third in the placement of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery in the healthy part, and make a fire cautery at the top of the ear on one side of the pinna, and another one at the temple as far back as one finger's width;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the fire cautery there for as long as half of the skin has burned away;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	is the form of the fire cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the appearance of the scalpel that we have described above, but it is a little more delicate and the blade should be a little thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the fire cautery has been placed as I have said before, for as long as it remains healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you treat it in this way as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then make four fire cauter
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	I cut off the two horns of the head, and I pull out the head, and I put fire on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	Of lime.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this illness requires that the patient take great pills and bitter drinks for his brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after I have cut off all the head of the patient, and put on it the mustard poultice as it is written or how to treat poultices;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If he is well then, good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not well, then I make three cauterizations by pulling out the head down to the collar, and I leave two spaces of a finger's breadth between each cauterization;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and the doctor does so as well, and if you see him struggling, the patient suffers, so he makes the fire cautery in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if his job is, in other places on the two horns, and the doctor as long as he is healthy;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and be the fire cautery which is called 'olive', as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of years and of what we have said above;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after he has washed the head of the patient, then he makes the fire cautery on the head and each horn, and behind and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more need to do it, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is beyond, so he makes four cauterization on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and he leaves until the top of the curative is burned, and gently take your hand away;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	After the cure, as long as he is healthy, and the cauterization which is called "olive" that we have mentioned above.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy Do not apply fire cauterization to the head except for those who are feverish; it is necessary first to wash the skull with yeres and other remedies that we have mentioned in the section on treatment when the patient is ill and suffers greatly from medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a baby who cannot suffer the pain, let him gargle and chew with bones often with good meat;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	After the king has been placed in the middle, and I have cauterized according to what we have said above, and I cauterize on the thigh, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the patient is far away and suffering, let him have the cauterization as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of the limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive cauterization be done according to the way I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the disease is far advanced and painful, make the fire cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excess fluids or腐敗 and thick pus, then the fire cautery on either side as we have said to him who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if for the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moistened, then he does him a drinking thing so that his brain is purified, according to what it is in front in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After the king has been placed with the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	After that I make a tourniquet of linen well made, just as I do a loop, if I place it on the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the sick person is laid on his side, and must be held fast all around.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after applying the ointment, it should be covered with old beard butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat gently over fire, so that he may drink if he can bear it;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after emptying the circle inside out and wiping the head dry, and let it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the sick person every week with good government until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see cauterize the neck by making punctures in all places.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of fire cautery moistens the skull slightly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put cotton wet with butter and with grease on the scalp.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the hair comes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient one thing purifying the skull, and warding away all moisture, and making it sweat or bathe many times while fast.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After he has washed his hair, he instructs him to get a fire cautery on the head, and to have two cauterizations on the temples together, or one cauterization each, depending on whether they are on either side;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut all cauterizes all veins and arteries that are out of place, and let the cauterize be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and guard against the loss of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, let it stop with a cloth so that you can keep it.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you how to cauterize arteries and incisions, how to stop the bleeding;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	nor do we ever make a cauterization or an incision behind the two bones.
dou cors des larmes	the two walls of the eyes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the eyes have been torn and are used to being cut, and the arteries that are in front of the eye;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and we can see that it is a cold and phlegmatic excess, therefore I make the cauterize that I said at the beginning of the eye descending to the tears:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize the crown, and I cauterize on the two temples, and I cauterize where the jaw joins the skull.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if it is necessary, if the cauterization bleeds above the ear, then a small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the two walls of the eyes within the tears
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat it according to what we have said in the section on treatment, and it does not help, then do three nights of bad dreams.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	After he has raised the crown, and he makes a cauterization at the center of the olive-colored cauterization;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauterizations of the cauterization called "clavis" on the two ears, a little bit away from the hairline;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and guard against the vessel that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	for
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see that you make two cauterizations on the two ears as long as the ears are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave the hand free except as long as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	دو شعر که از موهای سر بیرون می‌آید
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	No time has passed when the hairs of the oil are converted to the parched, and they touch the oil, and I make fire according to two ways:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	it is to be understood from fire, or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the medicine on the body;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after signing on the paper of the hairs a shape that is also like the fur of the oak tree, and is the beginning of the sign of the hair;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	and then I took cotton moistened with vinegar and muskellunge of persils over the oil, and then heat the fire for this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterize on the shape that you have signed little by little many times, that the burn be made at the place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the height of the oil;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand up, and leave it like that for three days, then I took cotton moistened with butter as long as it heats;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the cure of ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened then start again the fire at that same height, as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs go away, then cauterize as long as the paper goes back to its natural height, and is even, and does not touch the hair to the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The remedies of hot medicine are that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a fern leaf;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	and take French soap and hot water, each of one , and well grind them together;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and make it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then, in the shape of the fern leaf that you have made, put the hairs on the parchment;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease only affects one side, then operate on one side and also on the other;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and dip the cotton wool in oil moistened with urine;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the patient being on your healthy side, place the medicine on it, and press the poultice and suck the juice every time the patient feels a tingling sensation from the medicine, because he also feels a tingling sensation as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have been sick for a long time, then take this medicine at your tongue.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the mouth has passed, then raise the jaw up, and keep it raised as if it were raised by the constraint of fire or by incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if so, then well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, then put more medicine on the place where it has not worked yet, until your hairs are even, and your eyes are set in their sockets.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put cotton wetted in oil on it until the burn is healed, and after that, treat the jaw of the infection called "dysentery" and other things, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to care for your wound with great care so that it does not get irritated by the medicine's hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after that, and the hairs stand up in oil, then begin again the medicine on the place that is softened by the paper properly, just as you have done before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and after that treatment until it is well.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the flesh of the heart:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	Now know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to what is fitting for you.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not answer right away the question to those who ask about this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For the treatment of fistulas by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating fistulas as we have explained in the section on diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Tell the patient to place his hand in your lap.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the hair of the patient's head between your hands so that it does not move or fall;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after you have dipped a cotton swab in wine or juice of pomegranate on oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heating the iron instrument which is sharp;
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and place it on the head like the shape of a feather from a dove, together with the mouth so that the iron tool is:
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, if it is pointed at one end to the other, and if you do not see, if it is like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but anyway, this who is the head worth must move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	After press the fistula if it is open, and do a treatment of perspiration, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, if you work, and treat firmly the bowels;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after put on the fire carefully, and hold your hand to the fire at the part down of the oil, that your hands do not make madness;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the fire in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, if you restart the fire again once, and other than that you need to do, and leave it III days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after I put on cotton wet in butter, and the care of the infection drying as long as it is healthy, and pass XL days that it is healthy, then put on medicine sour corrosive as long as the bone is uncovered;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and let him choose according to what he will come with his chest.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I know one way to cauterize a fistula, which no one of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Listen to a fistula, and seal it up.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	After that, we will place a thin layer of substance on the incision to protect it:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and we will make the quantity of one tablespoonful of paste;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold it firmly with your hand, and do not move the patient so that the melted paste does not run down to his oil;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary that we put on the patient's cotton cloth wet with oil of olibanum or with ointment;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	The paste should be applied to the hole of the fistula, and it will heal by a wonderful healing power.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the fire that we have spoken about, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you should administer a punch to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what is suitable in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	in the fissures of the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	These times have caused fissures in the lips, which are called "warts", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these fissures as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then in a small cauldron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And put it carefully in those crevices until it hardens;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, treat the hole with ointment until it is well.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When abscesses form in the root of the tongue or in the uvula, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after putrefaction and rot and are enveloped and become fistulas;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then it is necessary that you have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the opening or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the source thereof, and where it is;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice, after the cure we have said, until he is well;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is cured so, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines, but that does not help, then put the head of the sick in your healthy one.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	After warm the cautery so its form will come out after in a way that you put a chain over the teeth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put inside it carefully, and hold it so that the sick person feels the heat coming from the root of the teeth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	After remove your hand and start again the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	After fill the sick person's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and rinse it well.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way the tooth which was moving is fixed, and the gums which were softened are tightened, and the moisture which corrupted is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When the pain of the teeth comes from cold, or there is cold or fever, and medicines do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	A cauterization with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in a spoon of iron or brass.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	After, take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a needle, and squeeze out the milk into butter, and put it on the sore tooth carefully and keep it in place until it cools down;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and often so that its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if the wool and cotton become wet with butter and are put on the sore tooth, and put on iron hot until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauterization together if it is such that you squeeze a piece of iron or brass wire, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the sick person;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	After, heat the cauterizer, so that its shape comes out later, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterization cools down;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Make this frequently, for the pain will increase on the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter when applying this fire cautery, and then quickly rinse it out.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	This is how you make the fire cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make this cautery on the corner of the mouth that you want to, and according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	This is how you make the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the abscesses are swollen and cold, and do not respond to medicines by means of digestion, then heat this head-cauterizer; for there are two openings so that the fumes can rise from one side and come out from the other.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	And place the fire cautery hot on the abscess once, or where it is necessary to do so, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if it boils up, make a small cautery according to the quantity of the boil, and leave it like this for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put cotton wetted with balm on it until the burn has healed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, use oil and poultices until it is healthy again.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the leg:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture conquers the chest of the patient and most importantly when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient must be emptied first by soluable medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	Afterwards, make a cauterization at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go any further up the throat, and only apply it with a little heat.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	Afterwards, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the base of the spine, and let this cautery that is called 'clavicle' give us the shape beforehand;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the wound as we have said above until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and the disease of the liver are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or chills, and is an ancient disease, then make a fire cauterization on the lever in its eyes;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and another cautery boils the urine between the breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cauterization which is called "the clavicle" according to the shape that has been said above.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make cauterization by poking at all the cauterization which is called "the point" of where the shape is above in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the points only up to XXX, or stop before the end.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treatment, follow this method described earlier, and let the cauterization be done in three steps according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those who are less able, do three together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	to prevent the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After, have the patient lie on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	After, give the patient the potion that is inside the phlegm with both hands of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated from within, then heat the fire cautery that has two sides here is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize it until he pierces it up to the coast, and come the figure of the cautery all together four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and because it is made with fire cautery that has three sides, so that the form of cauterization are five cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and they are the nerves according to the subtility of a thread and this is the form of the cautery that has three sides:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is placed on this nerve for there are 8 cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After he puts himself on the fire cautery to grind with silk;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Then rest the patient, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well relaxed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, such a thing happened, then make the cautery on the thick part of the cautery with a claw, or many cauteries pierce it.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is taken from the bone, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come colds and moisture as it is taken out of its composition, and are multiplied to him, and the customs of cures are used, and he does not benefit, then the patient should be carried on his back, and his legs and hands spread out.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	Therefore later he does three cauterizations one on the tip of the finger per the quantity of a grain, at all the cauterizes are crossed, and two cauterize from the two sides as much as the form of the cauterizes is made by three angles, and there is a part between each one that they do not join together when they move by fire;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterize be so perfect that it burns the two parts of the wound, and let the shape of the cauterys follow this form without touching:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you burn the stomach with a large cauldron according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and whoever has fear of this cauldron, burn and sign on the stomach at a point according to the quantity that you see fit to;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then let him burn all the cauldron which is called 'the point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound that we have had before, until he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	As for the liver, it comes pain from cold and moisture and thick windiness, as much as it is strongly removed from its natural composition by the excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is cured of what we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit him, if the patient is silent on his hemorrhoids;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and mark with three caustics according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, so that the hypocondes, from where the cuts of the ome come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and let there be space between each cautery the thickness of two fingers.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cautery be long all the way down, and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and be burned only halfway down, and let the patient lie on his back;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, then let him lie on his side, and extend his legs, and raise his breasts;
et c’est li forme:	this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your will is, when you cauterize these cauterys of the skin, that you be subtle and wise in this art, and guard yourself so as not to burn all the way down, for you would parch the whole body;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not go any further than a pimple, for the cut is very delicate in that place, and the sight to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	If he has an abscess in the liver, and you need to know whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	If it's in the parenchyma, then the patient feels pain that isn't too intense;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	If it's in the capsule, then the patient feels acute pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment for the blisters was finished, the patient would become confused about his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then sign to where the abscess is and then heat the fire which is similar to a toothpick, so as to form it;
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize until the wound has all burned, and bring it down to where the hair grows, so that the scalp is completely furred over;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of the ulcers until he is healthy;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not good for anyone who has not studied medicine to use this fire treatment, because these diseases have never been cured by it.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And then he can take it as hard as possible, and it seems to me that he should leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the plagues,
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancient ones said that one must do for pleurisy root cauterizes of arisology, and by this method:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	Take a root of arisology that is long, the largest you can find, and dry it as well as making it as big and as long as your two hands.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and soak it in oil and hold it to the fire, and cauterize I cautery between the jaw and the neck, and two small cauteries one little descending into the part that is hairless;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauterys between the fifth rib and the sixth, in going down a little behind;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery over the anus and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two ribs farther back from the one that is between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not squeeze my hand, but make it open as well as you would when smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And said no old man that any man use fire cautery like a razor, and blow it and put it between the ribs, until he comes to the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and saunter for the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they devoted three ways of cauterizing that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which there is a way that you do three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the patient be sore on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery that has two edges, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and leave the cut that is on the mouse's side, where the patient's cut comes towards the left, and let the elevations that you cut be aligned with the cut, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be aligned with the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After, pour the two waters boiling as long as the sound of the knock is perceived from the other side, and then treat with fire, and so in it will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, then cauterize until all the cautery is three.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has been left to stand for a long time, and this is true that the other cure in front of it must be finished.
de ydropisie	of droopsie
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Do not cauterize by the method called "ascultation".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure according to the ways we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is appropriate that you make four cauteries around the bouge, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the back of the spine, and one place on the pelvis;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauterization be well placed near the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After, leave the fire open for a long time, and do not let the patient's wound remain untreated after the cauterization;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	And the healing would hurry, and both intentions would be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is like a nail that we have before us.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and this for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is described here in front.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydropic and are pale yellow in color, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the cautery without turning back.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in all of it, lest the yellow [color] would be forced out, and the cautery is made according to its form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After that, do two cauterization on each leg at the tip of the heel;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and be the cautery long, one from behind the knee in front and the other away, in front of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cautery on top for a long time without cauterizing, so that the blood comes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After this cure of those other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtue that retenues and digests which is in the stomach and in the intestines is affloated, and cannot be cured by any way of cure;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do I great cautery on the stomach according to what it has spoken before or cautery of the stomach, at the circulation of cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four cauteries around the navel subtly to all cautery nail-like, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the knuckle, and a cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries on the stomach, for the cure is profitable when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	in the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or more, and are old and are great cold and moist corrupt humors, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and does not benefit, if do cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	and three on the spine of the back, which is all out of the body slightly and slightly in squaring, and two cauteries around the navel two;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cooled down, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the skin, then on the skin I grant cautery over the stomach, as it is said before, and another over the liver, and another over the mouse to all the cauterized clavicles;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After care, let the wound heal until it is well.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh that is called “thel”
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut the hellebore, if you heat up the cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all on fire on the chopped hellebore;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and I leave so much your hand that the cauterization comes to the birth of the vein, from which it is not cut short;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much hellebore, then cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatments with beneficial herbs until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cauldron over fire, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear cutting or opening, which we will tell you in your place, so comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no outlet for the wind, and it is agitated and vomits pus and moisture, then it must be given an extremely subtle treatment, and you must know exactly how much of the treatment is perfect.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	After heat the cauldron that looks like a razor, and pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that it has entered, and restart the cauldron as long as that heart is infected and rotten, once or II or III, according to the quantity of the remedy required;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and protect yourself from the nerves that are inside, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	If the fistula goes to the core of the bladder and intestine, protect yourself from these nerves, and do not make fire except in the flesh, and think that it is not useless;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	After you have healed the nerve as long as it is healthy, and if the nerves are scarred, and the matter is ossified for a long time, then know that the nerve is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not osteous, know that the bones are three, and the bone is corrupted at its root.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and so with one of these that we will say in his place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When the pain of frost comes with rain and a heavy wind, and does not take the shape of a woman, then you must make a fire on either side at the clove-joint that we have mentioned above;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize it in the middle, then there will be three cauterizations in a line, and greater help will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from frost and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then you make a fire in the part opposite the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, and one on each side, and let each cauterization be as long as a finger.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and let me cut the back, where you have been pricked.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauterization be made according to the shape described above.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the marrow is cold and moist, and will not allow conception, and the flowers are decaying and late in maturing;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, such great pain is felt:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then you must make three cauterizations around the loins, as we said above in the cautery of the bladder, and a cauterization on the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauterization be made by claving, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hindquarter
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the leg is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and find the line of the hip joint department, so that you can cauterize the patient on the hip joint box at the circle-like cautery, and sign in front of the line around the box as it comes back, so that the box is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	And if there is such fire cautery as that which we use to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	If this fire cautery is not present, then make three cauterizations with the olive oil, and also make it completely as all the keys;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	for the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the dislocation, and the cure does not work, and the illness is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then you must purge the patient of great humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After that, make a fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the method of the cautery should be according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	it is as follows together hot medicines and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery if it is according to the manners of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	To cauterize the hip of the horse III triangular cauterizes according to this form, and you make it deep and wide, and have between each cauterize a space whose size is that of two fingers, and let the cauterizes be olive-colored;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	No one does fire cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, for there are three according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, if the cauterization is with a circle of fire that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	But do it in this way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the thickness of the leg is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes only to the thigh and leg, you do two cauterizes here where the patient says that the pain holds him back, and one cauterize above the ankle three fingers, on the left side a little bit;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauterization of the knife, and let burn the thickness of the skin.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three fingers or four or five away from the wound, cauterize it at one of those points with the fire cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if they are qualified, let them do it more often.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	and if he says that the pain is in his knee and goes towards his thigh, then you make a cauterization with the knife or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations so that you do not leave them for too long; neither do you burn the nerves nor the large arteries, and do not cause the patient too much damage and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have made a cauterization on the heel of the foot and left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the bones as well, and it became pierced and rotten throughout the bones.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution for the stomach which has brought death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, make a fire cauterization in one and in the other, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men say in the cauterization of the hip, as for this manner, you should do it and make it at the top just as thick as a fingernail or a little less, and between the cheeks and also from one cheek to another with a space the size of a fingernail;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let there be between them two bars, and also as knots, and I have one of iron well made;
et c’est li forme:	this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is quite red and cool it down, and then put it on the hip bone of the sick person, and turn it around the small of the back;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and the fire cautery once more and let him rest for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	then do an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the course of ointment until it is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of its danger, and those who use it little;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and all the same this is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts him.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The medicine-burning cauterizes if you make an instrument from which the end of the margin of the door extends, and it is of brass or iron to a long wall, and there are two of us, and each has the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be placed above and below, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After you have put the box on the patient's back and made sure that it is steady, and you hold your hand very close to the patient's back.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you have placed the two circles of hot metal, which are heated in a firepot, and leave them for an hour, and allow the patient to feel the heat and the burning:
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For it will produce the same effect as fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	And when the mordication has passed, you remove your hand from the instrument and lift up the hot box, and let it stand for three days, and put on butter as much as that which is blackened by the burning:
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let him leave for three days to get well from the wound;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be behind help after the healing of oints as long as he is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, then do you make the instrument small according to what you have done in the hip more
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	is the way of the hot awes, and I have written it or the healer of the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Get alkali and live charcoal, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or there is a small hole with which the point of a razor can enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and put another pot well filled there, and put alkali and heat and soft awes on it, until there are two powders above them that you can well pour into your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and let it rest like this until it releases hot awes and pee or pot that is well filled, then take all the hot awes and put them on alkali and heat as before;
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then if it is wet, let it rest and recover with the medicines of the doctor and other fire cauteries.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it does the same work as fire, and if it is mixed with other medicines, of which one cauterizes well the wound with turpentine and myrrh and calamine, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a remedy where one honourable person was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he mowed the grass, and said that no other remedy was used, and he was healed at once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it is said in this way that you squeeze the green and dry chalk, and grind it with a little fat, and put it on the wound and on the thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it rest;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and leave it for three hours and so that the patient does not feel the burning anymore.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bathe as much as his body is a little warm, and let him get into bed, and the pain will go away completely and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Diescoraides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's hair, it helps a lot;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and wipe it with oil, and put it on the fold that is between the thumb of your hand and the other which is called the finger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking the dried hair, and burning it until it is charcoal, put it on the wool, and leave it until it is burned.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again, and do not stop doing it as long as you think by reason that it comes up to the hip, and that the pain is stopped;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterization of cheese".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from shaking or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of cold material spread out, none of these appearances is worth cauterizing, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary that after the patient has voided any foul stools or similar things, one should make three lines of cauterization on his back where the pain is, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let it be made according to the cauterization which is called "poins";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, do III or IV at the cauterizing claw according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight lining when they stand up and are afraid.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you will find in the back of the neck of the two and in us the appearance that comes on the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you see him healed, if you cauterize him with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cauterizes each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, then cauterize inside the spine with fire that is two or three lines long, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, cure the area as long as it remains healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire to gangrene which is in the tissue of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When the joints are painful due to moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, which the people call "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicine, it is cured with fire in one way.
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make the fire of the cauterization inside the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cauterization according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you hold on the face of the foot, so it is cauterized with all the cauterization that one claims "no point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come only to the genitals and to other joints, and this happens many times, then you make a fire cauterization on each testicle three times or four times of each part, with all the olive oil cauterization;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have to do more, then do not hold your breath but only as much as the fire has burned the flesh.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then the cauterization administered as said in this chapter of the chaplet.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	If the pain is in the hands, then do not cut off the skin more than two lines deep;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains some pain in both, then do not cut too deeply on each joint and on the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pain comes only to the shoulders or just to the neck, then cauterize each part and give good advice to the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	Because if you do this good government and you purify the pus, then you will be healed by God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphyl
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When the cut comes in the throat, and the balls fall down to the cheeks and it is a new wound, then you must not let him talk at all that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and he uses things that make his belly wet, so that the end comes out of his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Then set the fire cautery upon his back between your hands, and command him to let his hair grow long while the boils are being dried, and pull them towards his hands, and sign with the iron from above the knuckle of the hand, and make a whole sign that is like the half of a circle above the body;
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and dry.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	Then reset the bolas to their places;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the ministers let his hand burn so that it does not turn back;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and put a cushion and an assistant on his legs, and another one under his feet that burns his hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	Then place the cautery on the bone with all your hand, and hold it steady and keep it there until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then try again another time until you touch it;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and be careful so that the fire does not spread when you are making the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	so that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that by this the patient does not die, or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary that the cautery of small children be delicate according to their size, and also for grown-ups according to theirs.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days treat the bone with butter until it is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	After treating with other remedies as long as it remains healthy, and lay the patient face down for 40 days on his back as long as the wound is well healed;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary that his nostrils are relaxed for a long time so that the fire does not protrude when he tries to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made wand is given to him and held for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let there be good rest, that he work little and guard against too much drinking and eating, and too loud breathing;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And when he practices this teaching, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of the tailor in his paste.
de la routure dou ventre	from a rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When the sores come in other bellies and are infected, and you see that they no longer grow, do the cauterization of the cauterization according to its quantity, and burn the third of four;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and no one of the old has said that he must cauterize at the three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the base of the belly and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another behind it, and with your hand spread all over the past with the nail.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterization is lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, whether from a strain or from an injury, and this pain persists for a long time, and the medical treatment is of no use, then it is appropriate that he be cauterized with the cauldron which is called “poins,” and the cauterization be carried out according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	If he is well after the first fire cautery, it is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	Take note of this name, then begin another fire cautery on that one, for it is custom that the hair must grow on the member closest to the patient, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is well.
de meselerie	of trembling
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The month of May is never treated by fire cautery with great help, and least of all does the disease come from the decay of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Can you see the burn patient? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is healed according to what we said in the division, and does not decrease or remain stagnant, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the whole body, then make V cauterizations on his head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I cut off the hair at the back of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the nape;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and I leave it until my hand feels the burn, and until the hair comes off in pieces so that the vapors of the bad odors can come out;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	and if his skin is everywhere sparse;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and if his skin is visibly sparse, then you must cauterize it with the cauterizes that we have said above the shoulder, and one on the neck, and two on the back, and one on the skull, and another on the chest, and one on the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the knees, and two on the hips, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and in the grooves of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and beware of the nerves that are behind the heel of the foot, so you don't burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and never make a cautery on the bone of the hand, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more I make fire cautery, the more I make help, and it profits.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel pain from the fire cautery as the healthy person feels it, for this reason the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the way of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, leave the loin of bread with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When the swelling grows in any member and is cured by medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not healed, then you make cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cautery go in a little way into the flesh of the part;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And never make fire cautery at the hand or foot or back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is fractured;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in any way do not get involved in them unless you know the limbs and outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of the barbers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine's essence is not useful, then cauterize with a fire cautery a little perfectly, according to the quantity of the spice used, until the blushing is taken away, and its color is moved.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then heal with flour of vegetables and lentils with oil of rose and leaves of plantain, and blood of collard and almond, each a part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix all together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound as long as it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment for leprosy by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leprosy appears at first, and you see it stop, if the cautery with fire that seems like a circle, is applied all around the leprosy spot.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And all the wise men say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and to me this does not seem good, for I fear that it will become an ulcer and rotted, and I have never wanted to do it once;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and the most right thing is that it be cauterized inside, at the cautery which is called "circulating", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes long to die or for the excess of blood that the sick person has or for the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or for the heat;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see him hurry to die:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then let it be cauterized inside with small cautery stings by piercing;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced with all the cauterization, let the fire of the cauterization be hot:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has pierced the heart, and let it be such cauterization that the sick person feels heat in some way so that the course of decay is accelerated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another type of disease is called "corrosion," which is nothing more than a members' rot, as it eats away at the members just as fire dries up wet wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can suffer from fire, then heat the clavels small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards cauterize all of it until you leave no corruption behind, and nothing remains of it but what is corroded; so that everything that is corrupted is taken away.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the burned places so that the burns from the fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment with ointments causing burning.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that the hair does not grow, it is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, start again the cautery on who is delayed in his place corrupt.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this ointment is never yet cured with medicine of water in place of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the water medicine in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come from the stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	For many times it happens that by accidents a disease is born which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big thing which blisters the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say fire cauterization, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery should also be done as if it were a penis, and let it be made of good iron at the measure that it can push the nail from all sides, and let there be subtle margins;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	After this put all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the tip of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave him for three days until he begins to get diarrhea.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of wild mallows that have been crushed with water, and leave the poultice on all night, and tie it on tightly and let it root out from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if his body is turned by diarrhea and many times comes out in hand and pies, then you must bring him fire cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	In this way:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a rope of copper or iron, or a feather from a swan, and put it on the nail and the athelol, that is to say, to dry out warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the rope on it so that it turns red all around, then put a little hot water on it, and keep your hand well away, and press your hand in turning so that the margin of the rope comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water's path deep until the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and suffer the disease a little of the sharp hot water an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it like this, and it will all fall out at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do another, until you have healed all those who are in the root, then cure the wounds that generate pain.
li cure dou trembler	to cure trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When some shake with cold, or with a quarterly fever or another, it is convenient that you make three or four cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cauterization at the feet, and one on the stomach with olive-colored cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	will leave it trembling, and will hasten the saint from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Now and then, apparent on the body by bad smells, blisters full of pus, which come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	is convenient in the first place, when they seem that one make cauterization on each head of the pimple:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of a vine of mirth, of which the point is taken in the fire, or of a root of a long-word, or of a lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And never do the cauterizations start when it appears according to this way, and they cannot grow hair before, but the surplus is cut off from which they come, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 종종 혈관 파열로 인해 큰 출혈이 일어나는데, 이는 상처에 도달하거나, 부위 또는 목동에서 발생하는 것일 수 있으며, 유사하게 보입니다.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	And it is a bitter thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And in any case when it appears, if you hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound and hold it there while the blood stops flowing from it, and no drop more comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then place fire-bated olive oil on it a few small and large ones as long as it is all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And then take the fire cautery, or large or small according to the wound, and place it on this vein where you hold your two hands, and keep the cautery there until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you feel pain when you press your thumb above the elbow, and the cauterization burns, take another cauterizing tool that is hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing one after the other until the blood has stopped flowing;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be careful that you do not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other evil comes on the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when the artery is cut short, one cannot stop it bleeding well even if the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not yet been treated, or by a strong thread tied on, or by medications put on that have the power to stop the bleeding;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and be laid and held fast together.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tightening of the bandage tightly with fire or other burning things upon it, or similar things, if he does not benefit from it, let him do nothing.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and he does not have any mirth or medicine presented, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch well until it is stuck above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move him, but keep him dry of cold often that it is damp cold as soon as the sun is cold until it is frozen and thickened and stuck.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make inquiries in advance of those for whom it is necessary to use cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for diseases of the body.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter of all diseases when it is necessary to use fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the questions and causes and instruments and forms of cauterization;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have put this chapter of the head up to the foot, and I will go in this chapter through that same way for those who hurt more lightly than those who run;
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary, O you who hear, that you learn that with this ointment there is greater danger and fear than with the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to take any foolish risks.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the ways of men come many kinds of trouble.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	If one comes from such people who, with their disease, die easily because of the violence that they bring upon themselves due to the greatness of their illness and their wickedness;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and of this one must be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these people whose sense is taken away, and who say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	Wait, I am dying.
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is fitting that you concede to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open wide but carefully from him whom you are sure, and from whom you may have taken and lost.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prediction and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is converted;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to gain a good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice; and if you will ask for the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in speaking by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizing potions, which I have devised from the top down, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	 Dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes from babbling too much when the child is an infant, and when the baby's bail is drawn too strongly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and never does this come of a resolved cause which one does not understand.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease affect anyone but children, and all those whom I have seen die quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and so for what I can tell, it seems to me that it is better to lessen the work of this chapter in treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw a child whose shoulders were wet, and the head turned from side to side every day until it could no longer be sustained.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it killed him, and this moisture mixed with the bone on his side, between the cheek and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and this work is so great that the moisture is mixed with the bone, and the abscesses are small, so you should make a wide slit in the head with the knife;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and also as far away as we can go, until the moisture runs;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and have this form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess is larger, then you make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	and if the moisture has mixed with the bone, and the signs that you see are the folds of the head turned inside out on each side, and when you press it with your hand towards the inside, water jumps out; and this does not return:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary for you to cut a man's hair, cut it according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After removing the drape and powder from the wound, apply wine and oil, and leave it like that for five days;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Then unbind it, and heal the wound with tendences and ointments, and let the hair grow evenly, and feed the patient dried meat of some moisture until the limb is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	Another method of incising is to look at the opening of the anus and the angle of the rectum;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	For there is no time before;
aucune fois derrier;	There is no time behind;
aucune fois en destre;	There is no time to the left;
et aucune fois en senestre.	There is no time to the right.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then where the anus opens, and the filling of the rectum, and do as much as you are able to;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and guard against covering the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and bring a flux of blood, so that the patient dies from the pain of blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Here is a possible translation of the provided text:
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "catarrah" in either the nose or throat, and the disease is old, and the treatment of medicine does not benefit, then the last treatment is to cauterize with what is used to plug the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	It is therefore necessary, since you cannot cover the eyes, for the patient to remove his hat;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the area with an arid cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove all of the patient's clothing;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein pulsates, and the backs of the hands are turned towards the head and the palms towards the feet;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then sign the backs of the hands, then cover each with a flat piece of wood on both sides until the bone is reached, and the same for the top of the head;
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, plug the sphincter with astringent powder into the artery and cover it with a bandage, also cutting as I have said above.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, let it continue to bleed constantly.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery is not felt at first, then measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then sign the back and make an incision just to the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and what is to be done about the blood should be six cups, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the sick person can bear, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone without a scar, and if the wound that was cut does not come out, then extract the wound and stitch it up, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grating
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient catarrh comes, and the muck from tears and heat in the temples and old feverishness and similar things, and it is cured by ways of medicinal remedies and all that does not benefit him, let us extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the way to extract them is that the patient should let his hair grow out on his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is a little too weak to be heard in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	if it is dilated, the patient should be taken out of some sheets, then rub the place with no sharp cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	and then take the spatula whose this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	Then peel away the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then twist it upward into pinches, and well remove the membranes that are attached to each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And if the artery is thin, then twist it at the point of the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of the two claws.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, then there will be no saving of life in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	And make an incision of the six quarters, just up to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	And if the artery is large, then you should tie it with a strong double thread of silk, so that it does not burst before the wound closes, and so that it heals quickly;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	Then cut away the excess that is between the two threads at this same time, and then, if you see it, so that the cauterization with the cautery knife goes up to the bone as soon as the claws are cut;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is a hot fever, and he is of a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauterization is done to end the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for such is the great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or, for the extraction of arteries, it is necessary that one fill the place with fine linen and put on well-made tents;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are removed, so let there be cured of dry medicines that cause the birth of air, and of tents, as long as he is healthy;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if there is no need for an artery ligature as you work, so hurry to stop the bleeding with a cauterization, or employ the vinegar at the place and extract it with your hand so that the stain does not remain;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have any present, so place your finger on the place as long as it is frozen, and raise the place of cold water as long as it stops, and extract it as it should be;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and he who is wounded and lighter in the extraction of the artery, it is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp fire of two sides, but let the sharp be well spread so that they last longer on their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives a space of an inch and a half, and then when you have cut through both ends, and you take hold of them with your hot iron, until it comes to the bone, and then stop the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be distant between the two heads because it is not bound by this fire of everything;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	is its form;
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the blood are descending from the veins that are on the forehead of the shoulder, and there is no benefit of the cure of medicine that is done, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and it feels cold;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and so the oil is thin and moist that the hairs of the papers are lost, and the papers are heated, and scorched by the heat of the tears, so there is a need for this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And they called it the 'ancient cure', and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease on his hair or forehead, then he makes three incisions or forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the incisions is also like two whole teeth all the way down to the nape, and the others are II half teeth on top of the papers, and be careful with the incision of the arteries that are on top of the papers;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, and be each wound III teeth in length joined together;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and equip yourself with a sponge piece and many cloths to wipe the blood, then pour the sputum gathered from both sides of it is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision that is due to the temple just up to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and peel off all the skin that is between the two cuts all the way to the whole part that is on the bone, then do the same thing from the middle incision just up to the other second one, and then remove this sputum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If water is added to the first cut of the instrument called “culteur,” and it is very sharp on one side and soft on the other, it is this shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the edge of the cutting tool facing towards the carriage at the top, and make the edge soft towards the bone, and add water until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the hair that falls from the head at the incision as long as it is continuous up to that which opens from the neck, and then do the same thing in the middle cut just up to the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then remove it evenly, and extract the blood evenly, and squeeze out the blood;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	and put in each cut a tent of wet cotton, and put on damp cloths made with wine and oil and water, and take care that the abscesses do not come out;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and for the third day let him lie and I shall bring a great amount of cold water, then the treatment with basilic oil with rosewater, and other treatments to heal wounds until he is well.
dou reume des eulz	Dou reume des Eulz.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When there is any catarrh by custom, and you see the eyes red and small, and the vision dimmed, and the papers burnt;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair grows, and where the head hurts acutely and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then know that these matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the treatment that I give is right, for such is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the disease to raise his forehead, and then make a large cut on his forehead, and another with a wide edge.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin with the incision on the left temple up to the right temple, and go through the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when one cries;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the ear is uncovered, if you squeeze out all the blood with a sponge, and then wipe between the two lips of the incision and put cotton wool and linen bandages.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then place wet towels in wine and oil, and keep the abscess warm;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	When it is dislocated, if you rub the bone until it starts to bleed, then treat it with drying things, which cause dry spots.
En teil maniere:	In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of wheat flower and three parts of kohlrabi, and make a paste of it;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and apply it to the wounds to cause dryness all over.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the sticking up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All those who have their ears cut are among the four:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grain, or beast, or stone of a certain size, or similar things as iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, if it is jemmied, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or choose an antidote if there is water and ease and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it is chopped up in the ear or any other kind of thing that does not fit into the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, if there is no drop of purple oil or sesame oil, then let's bring extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and the blow is to shake off the condition, and the nostrils are closed when the shaking comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and let the ear be raised up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times it comes out strongly with this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come out strongly, let'n bring extraction with subtle pincers, for this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it comes out strongly with the pincers, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, let'n bring extraction with a small and subtle hook;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if not with the hook, then make a knife of iron and break off the end of the chief of the knife or the hole in the ear strongly, and stop up what is inside the hole with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the knife;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	Then the fire cautery is prepared, for much perspiration comes forth from it as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come forth in some way, then take up glutinous liquid and put it on the joints, and place on some instrument that is right for doing so, and put a little cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glutinous liquid upon stone or something else, and fire cautery.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	And if it does not come forth through all of these things that we have said, then hurry to split the ear in such a way as to cut the abscess and spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of splitting it so that you make the first treatment for the headache with the fire cautery according to its virtue, then place the headache between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small split at the root of the ear to the fat or where it depends.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and make the fracture like the moon, until you come to the stone, then take the bone according to your power, and suck it into your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cure it as long as it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a arrow that has entered and it swells, administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the sutil sponge according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and provide instructions for cutting the seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not use this method when you think that the arrow is moist due to moisture in the ear, as many times as you have done it;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract them with subtle pins and suckling, as we have said, so that the extractions are controlled.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Then, when he sneezes in the ear, the patient should use an instant treatment of water, and widely open the ear with a cotton swab.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be attentive to that ear where the sneeze is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it does not hurt, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	But if not, then take several pegs according to the length of your finger and make them light, and heat them a little on the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and cut off a part of his ear, and sew on it with one thread from the other side, and fasten to another stone on the stone in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not cease to make this stone by stone until the water has completely run out, and so it will be completely run through;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, then take a piece of wood, and dip one of the ears in fire, and the other ear with the hot piece of wood;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make another piece of wood with the hot piece until all the water has run out, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the arrow, if it is a small one, like a tick or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the dislocation.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is a large one that we can feel, then carry out the extraction with tweezers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	And this is the lighter thing to pierce, which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In extracting the worms from the ears, when you treat as we have said in the division and where to treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, if it is necessary that you look at the ear towards the sun:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there are no worms, if you treat with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the knot so that it is known what the shape is:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And pour out the thinnest chief in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck the form to all the knot;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	do this repeatedly until all the worm comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not submit to come out, if you stop up the knot with cotton as I said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the elderly have experienced in the lysis of worms, and you will find them or the treatment of distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and if you distil your oils and medications in the ear on all this instrument, so that it is this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And be of silver or gold, be heated to a small hole, and over the top for distillation;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press down on the instrument of silver or gold well made for this, and if you see take a razor and wrap it around the tip forward cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medications in the line, and the line is in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then pour into the razor all of the cotton, and press your hand gently as much as the oil is distilled or flowing from the ear;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and let the patient feel the heat inside, and let the distillation be small to the fire thus as one distills in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the sticking up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born with any perforations in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and this same thing happens to people by the accident of a wound, or a wheel inside the ear, and these accidents sometimes go completely into the ear if one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and never does any perforation come from fire, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which comes completely, if one cannot see it, is a painful treatment in many ways, and in this one can see that you put the patient's ear in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	If you see the clear operation, if the work has all this syrup of which there is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be careful and cut in front and behind everything flat, so that it does not hurt the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	If the operation is on the cheek or jaw of the ear, if you hold it with gentle pincers, and cut it lightly, until the bone is all exposed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ear wax is completely removed from the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it a little on fire, and then place the ear ring in.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the operation that the patient feels sharp pain in the ear, cut lightly and be careful not to hurt the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	Then put a tent in the ear according to its width, and wet it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do not touch it at all until the wound is healed, or take a tent and wet it with rose water, and powder it with vinegar brew.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear flee, so consider that you take the tent and move another wet tent made of oil and wax until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it as long as he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if pain comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that calm the pain which are or treatings of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	Cut the roots off with shears and pincers, and trim them with a scalpel from their bases;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on him vitriol broie.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	and if it does not come off with scraping, then the fire cautery with a fine lens-shaped fire, and the fire cautery after the incision moves more slowly.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and repeatedly scrape, so that nothing remains attached to their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are burned with fire, so the roots are singed and never return again.
de la gresle	of the gristle
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 часто come off in pieces that look like hair in shape and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "hairy" and consists of a mass of thick moisture on the surface of the paper.
li ovraiges est telz:	The surgeries are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	the injuries are as follows:
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	do not cut the large part, then burn each part lightly, then take it with tweezers, and clean it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cover it without piercing a bit of paper into it, do not harm the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the fracture is great, join it with a stitch and treat it until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not use force, for the swelling will restore it soon enough and harm it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	and if the fracture is going up from the ear towards the top, then turn the paper over, and take the fracture with tweezers, and clean it and press from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is severed by the incision, it causes no harm;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the rain is over, if you wash with salt water, and cure the place from that which has caused it, as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exina is a grease that is caught in the webs of paper above, and this happens more often to children than to others, and it grieves their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hasten to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and when they lie down on their faces at night, and sleep on it, and the paper above their eyes becomes moist, so that it swells and changes in appearance from the Exina which has penetrated into the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press down on the shoulder with your two hands and feel the escape between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the way of the treatment is such that the patient puts his head under water;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen garment, and prepare a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity that is contained outside each part, and then put it on him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the external quantity is gathered into the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	and cut in the middle of the moisture to the spatula with a sharp edge making a slit of the wide size, and is not more than that made at the vein opening;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and make the skin perfect until you come to the external quantity;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in multiple positions comes the external quantity of the slit, according to the form of a piece of bleached fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then take all a piece of linen cloth between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand from right to left as much as it is spread out;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and keep from jerking the wound, that you do not come to all the sputum until the oil, that you do not bloat it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the patient does not jerk at the wound, but gently pulls a little on the edge of the wound as it appears;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	Then remove it as we have said, then dip cloth in water and oil, and put it on the wound, and remove the bandages gently.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind seeds and put them on to corrupt this moisture that is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the place of an abscess gets hot, then the healer compresses with poultices as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When the hairs grow out, they should not be pulled except by nature, and they are wrinkled, so they hurt the eyes, and cause various diseases such as accustomed tears and soft skin of the hairs, until it is the cause of hair loss.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	And the treatment is according to four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	either by fire cautery, either by a medicinal drug according to that which it is before or by a cauterizing paste, and it is done by incising and sewing or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient on your right, then turn the oil paper to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is turned over, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, pour an needle into all the thread above;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and if this is not done, pour an needle into the margin of the paper where the hairs grow out, and thread all the way through the paper, and return it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then open up the part of the skin paper, pulling out the hairs, and measuring all of the skin with a long blade from the large wound to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then remove the thread, and put over the paper a little cloth and fabric, then sign on the paper a figure of an apple, as if it were a mirth, and in all cases, it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see lift up the paper which is laid out;
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if someone who is skilled at it uses a large amount of paper according to what the paper is softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then cut all the stain over the two lines you have signed and start large tears from little.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and be the one of the splits next to the hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour vinegar into one of the two corners where it is, and then scorch it all.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then join the two lips to a stitch of a needle with very fine thread, and wash the blood, and blow off the excess of the threads over the two sorcels at nothing sticky, if you see this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, if you are not cured of it, then leave the stitch and the threads until three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then heal the wound without stitch with drying and constricting things, because the paper is softened at the touch of the wound and gathers, but the stitch is rotted (if they said it), and that is painful work.
et si a une autre maniere:	and if there is another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	is that you sign the paper with a shape that is as much as the shell of myrrh, as we have told, at three times twist according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then take the one who is higher up, with small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you cannot hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take an awl with a thread on it, and bind the shape;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and another fine thread, and the second long thread, and the third short thread, and join them together evenly between your two hands;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then move your hand evenly, and then bind all the leather over where you have signed it, as we have told, then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and treat it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, so that the poultice and similar blistering ointment relieve it;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and never has hair from the paper been converted
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	if you use what we have said about incising;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but stitching in one place and another is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The cure for dogs follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and that you convert the paper and put it inside according to what I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two threads very long like the paper and the thread of the spurium is;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and tie as two heads on two sides where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then put together one and the other very carefully on what rises from the paper of the oil, and extract the two dogs from the two parts formed;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is extracted will die and shrivel and rot, as long as it lasts on its own.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it is delayed, if the cup has one force, then heal it as long as it is sound.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sewn up, and if the paper is raised, and cannot grow hair anymore;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	This is the form of the two knees that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	The work is such that you press a very fine needle, and you tie a very fine, soft thread;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then assemble the heads and bind them together very finely, and make the length of the threads a palm's length;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then order in the chase another very fine thread of silk, and bind the heads with it;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then put the patient's head on your shoulder;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and be careful of the sun so that the work is subtle and small, then insert the needle into all the hair at the root, and pierce it into the paper carefully as you pull it up from the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	Then remove the hair up to the nape, and pour into the nape that hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	Then remove your hand so that the hairs come out all at once into the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the nape is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then you shall pull the nape off at a single pull all the way down to the end that you have ordered, until the nape comes off from the top and you can see it through the sight of oil;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then if you pull the nape and the thread, and oil is left behind for two or three days until the hair grows in its place and the hair comes out.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hairs are small, then accompany with one long natural hair, and let it hang with that or leave it hanging until it is grown out and then cut off.
de la porriture de l’oil	for the oil rot
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease, which is called "alacrat" or the poultice comes in oil, there are two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one is natural and the other is unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And comes from a wound, or from the scalpel, or from a cauterizer, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method for treating it in this way is that you cut open the seal, separate the lips and put linen inside, and leave it until it is healed.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and you do not use anything to treat it that dries and constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but treat with softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the water or ale and flax seeds are cooked, and the castor oil is melted into any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a tent, and you treat with it of this disease.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your healing, if you keep yourself guarded that it does not become hard according to the form that it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and those treatments that we have said are only valid if we address this disease, so that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the horse that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "ascratic", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accidents come from wounds and cuts and burns and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the way of the chapter is that you take a needle, so that it has double thread, and tie it to the horn, and make it pierce from the left ear as far as the right, so that the thread comes in two shoulders;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Then put the horn above all the needle, and the cap on the wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And the form of the paper returns according to what is appropriate, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	If so, take a razor and put it into the fissure, and turn the paper, and make two slits where it cost in the paper.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and make the heads of the two slits at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, and let one angle be so that when they are assembled together, that the figure is as like to the figure of a letter which has not "I griesche".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then take away that one piece, according to the quantity that its edges are apart from the paper, then add the two parts cut off, and join them together with a thread of linen;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the cure for this that we have said about the softening medicines, and the tents, until it is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a fissure or stitch or cauterization, then it is necessary that you cut a plain slit in the hair of the paper, and according to what is above.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	Then separate the two leather pieces of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and you must prepare the application according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master surgeon will determine how to restore the shape to its natural state using all his powers;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and even the patient, according to what is appropriate for him in terms of application and tools in various preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	Et si soudain de la papier
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this weld is made in a certain way, that the paper on top is welded with oil white, and cannot move or perform its natural work, then it is necessary that you burn the tip of a razor onto the paper, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and spread them out as pinches, until you get the one that is suitable for the delicate sponge, which is not too sharp or too thick, so that the patient does not suffer from the very sharp sponge injuring the oil;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and so your incision, from which you peel off the gathered paper lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and all of it is healed, and never in acidic salt water, and in fresh water, and in vinegar;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil a wet woollen cloth in abundance of salt;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after three days use the collar and the hard things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	I know that the thumb has two ways of being treated:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and seems like hard medicine, and another that is not nervous, but seems like frozen moisture, which, when touched with iron and treated with heat, cannot stand it.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both types of appearance begin to flow towards the great tear, and grow larger and larger until they obscure all vision, all light, and all movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the way of incision is that the patient puts his head on your chest, then he opens his hair.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and leave the paper in your hand, then turn the nail around with small turns, and put it on top;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and I put a hair of horse, or of she-goat, or of ox, and a strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	then double the point of the needle a little and thread it through the nail, and pierce it with all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and put it on top, and peel off all the skin from the nail that follows the nail and the silk up to the head, then cut off the remaining in the root of the fingernail very carefully and finely and leave the nail natural or the nail, so that by incision does not come the blood of the vein as is custom;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and once their nails are cut short, and the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then burn it with fire, all its skin, so that there is no form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And keep the skin of the spine from touching the raw flesh and breaking it, and that the spur does not pierce it;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision pours into the oil a little vinager, and a collar made of lime, and leaves it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with this as much as is needed until they are healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not sore, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails do not go in, this nail-like appearance of medicine is cured many times;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow like I have told in the division, and if you see it covered with oil, do this to the patient, and take a little skin according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And raise the finger above the nail, and if you see that it is thinning little by little and the nail is pressing on it, let it distil from your mouth in an oil collar made of alum and red dye and a mixture, and stop the oil until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Then start again with the other wound according to this same operation as long as it is all boned.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If any other thing is opposite to oil in the skin, as an abscess does, then the milk, and first treat the abscess while it is sound, then resume the work as before until it is sound.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts greatly in the oil, let it be suspended for a while, and chop off some of it, not all at once, so that there is no pain;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	Then let it distil in the red oil which is made of alum.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	from flesh that grows on the pear tree
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some men have never had a red rash, and they rub the plums and hold them against the paper and turn them around, and it looks like a rose of baluster;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and if the patient puts his head on your chest, then he twists the hair, and all of it like snakes suitable for this, and supports it with strength;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first piece, and all of it cutting close to the skin until the end, and be careful not to scar the oil at the work;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision be with a spud that we have said in the incisions of the nail and small forces where one holds the bone with a pin, as the form after this chapter shows;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all of the bone, then employ the oil of seed or you distil red collyrium and similar medicines corrosive, and put cotton on the oil with a cloth of linen, so that it is assured for an abscess to heat;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if it does not wait, and the sun rises over you, and you doubt about a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing medicines that warm an abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And then return to your work as long as you are healthy, and in this way the char is held in place by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But it is necessary that you adapt the cure for each weak oil of the natural way;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in work with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand into any of these works unless you see that the limbs are suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	Let the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red, so that they are covered with oil, and tolerate its sight, and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	So it is necessary that you first examine which oil is good, and bad, and there is no other disease but the bad one;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	Then set aside this oil in a certain way:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, and then hang those veins in all places according to his wisdom, and let the veins be doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two oils by degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	and then gather up those veins carefully, and rinse away the blood hour after hour until you can remove those veins from the oil.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and keep the oil from splashing on the points of the spatules, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your work so that you only burn those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have finished doing this, let it distill in the oil of the green and red to corrupt what is left of the sebaceous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the power to gather everything up in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of soothing things that relieve the pain of the hairs, and let it stand for several days until the pain is relieved and is assuredly calmed down by the apothecary's heat, then begin again according to this manner which is before until it is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the force:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	the mirror which I call "arissati" hole:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	as you cure it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then cut along the abscess, leaving the dead part, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the corruption and blackness, then use all the instruments that I have described above to make this form:
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of fire from one end to the other end, and it should be pointed so as a file, as shown in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the end of the bone that is corrupted, and turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a little until you feel that corruption has gone:
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and don't do this again, then put back the place of medicinal drugs drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if his leg is stiff, and he cannot walk, and the spine of the bow is stiff, and remains so for 40 days, and does not renew itself or become an abscess, and bad accidents do not happen, since it is healthy;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	If not, if there is no other way except to bring the fistula to the navel according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron, and with medicinal herbs, and when it is uncovered take care that the head of the iron is at three angles, and the fistula is narrowed down to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then put the blade on the bone with care, and keep your hand away from the oil I cut, then turn all the iron as long as it pierces the bone and hurts the patient by what comes out of his navel if he holds his hand on his navel;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the place of dry medicine, as I taught you, and when the horse is born and hardens its parts, so bring the matter to the nose.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	This is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the escape of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes are open all the way around, and there is no distortion to the nose, nor does it decrease, but it is necessary that you lay the patient down;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the doctor, then put on him the cupping glasses so that it does not hurt to suck, then put on oil mixed with acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocoll, and then squeeze out the oil, and apply a poultice made of bandages and drapes;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the way of the bandages is that you squeeze soft bandages, and double each one four times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	and remove from above a hard piece of wood, and start again with suction to avoid injury.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	Then he removes the suction cups and lets the oil strain day and night, and the ligament becomes looser, so that you must remove it slowly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	Then he removes the ligature after day and night, and if you see the oil recover, it is good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then start again with plaster and bandages and the ligature and suction cups as long as it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The tearing of woven cloth.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the woven cloth, then open, and comes paper-like grains as if a resin seed, and is predictable to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it covered, the overlay is such that you push a needle into the root of the part almost up to the top, and then push another needle where the thread is doubled in the part of the rope;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and pierce her, and leave the first needle according to arrangement;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the thread in two places and tie one end of the loop, then tighten it well, then remove the needle and put another moistened thread in abundance of wax;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread sounds with the loop, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and no time the wound is restricted by a circular bandage of cloth each part of a circle, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the hair is very fine, if you pierce it with a very fine spittle that comes from oil in perfection, and draw away the moistened albuginous and cut the hair, and insert it soon;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	with oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alkunah" is only water that is gathered in oil, resembling water descending, and it is not water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the way of the appearance of this chapter is that you make sit the patient on one side bare and straight, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the bow come to your fingers;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let him sit down, and do not kneel or bend your back, and look at the patient's things as if he were alone;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not sit down, know that it is acute, and the sitting of the bow should not be bare as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	if you sit the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatchula and put it on the horny membrane I hole by the continuation of the conjunctive with the horny membrane and the crown, until the bow comes out;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is out, let it be distilled in hot acrid honey, or acrid water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let other cures be used until it is cured;
des aigues de l’oil	with the water of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have the appearance of needles in the incision, and what is necessary to pierce.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	for in the work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands crossed, away from the light by the sun, and press the healthy oil very strongly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then put the paper of oil in your left hand if the hairs are left-handed, or in your right hand if the hairs are right-handed;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the hairs are left-handed, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the hairs are right-handed;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then put the tip of the instrument at the base of the hair by its thick end in the blubber of oil in the part of the lesser larmier, then bottle the instrument which is called "almagda" firmly, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the blubber of oil, and feel that almagda comes to the hollow thing;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and the measure of the vein of mercury should be at the perfect measure of the space that is from the prunella to the end of blackness;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the crown of oil;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone in that paper for the clarity of the corned skin, and then put the instrument up to the water where it is, and then express one vein after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he faints now, then see the patient in front of him and the instrument on his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	Then rest for a little, and the water rises again the second vein, put the force with the instrument, and when it is well stuck and does not rise anymore, then draw out mercury lightly by turning your hand back and forth;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put a little of the green thread into the water, and leave it from that oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on one side the oily oil where or another moist thing in oil and a lot of water, and bind with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now then, and those who are of our sect, let us put on common broied with a lot of water.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the alum cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, for there are some men who have too hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And then pierce the conjunctive only, and do not go too deep with the needle, but make it fine, then draw out mercury, as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a dark place to sleep, so that he sleeps on his back.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be free of all movement, and eat light food, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for about three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then release him in that same dark house and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then he remakes the bandage until the seventh day.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or afterwards, but it is necessary that you prepare it beforehand, so that water does not mount up inside him.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if the abscesses are fresh, you should remove the poultice before the seventh day and apply the poultice from someone who soothes an abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is calm, if he does not lie down the face up, so that he may not see any more, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then out of the house little by little, and turn back to his case;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no one should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from Jericho, who told us that in his country there is such a thing as an earthquake, which sucks up water, but nevertheless I have never seen it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the signs of the shapes of almagda, for he who does not know them may see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be of pure bronze;
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And may the head of the two of this very subtleness be, and behind three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the neck from the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	And no one is born or dies of various kinds of horses, from which there are none who seem to be scorpions at the mouth of stones;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there is any of this or that it has green wax of fox, and if there is any good-colored wax.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In this case of the wax that is good, and not green, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and pour the ointment into these waxes, and massage them;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	and then you may take this that you have prepared with a thin spatula from one side, as long as you know that this wax is all bone;
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains nothing of it that you cannot cover, then open it with a very light and thin instrument, so that nothing stays behind;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and let him stretch out, or absess, as it is necessary;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if they are malicious abscesses, then hurry and cauterize as soon as the skin is stained and all the waxes are boneless, then pour or do not pour easily and quickly and run water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If there is no pain, and moisture comes up to the throat, know that he is well.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if there is no perforation like it should, know that he has a bone split above, so that the tool does not cut properly:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you must put a piece of linen thread, about an inch thick, between each tooth, and bind it tightly with the hands, and leave some space or less between each knot;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and put the patient's teeth in linen thread at his finger ends, and draw it through his nose while smelling until it comes out of the nose into the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times do this to the child while he is in school, and it is an easy thing for him who does it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and take one after another while we are threading the linen thread;
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Make it as long as you know that the new one has corrupted this thread, then treat the child, wash the blood, and soak the hair in Egyptian ointment, and put it back on the neck immediately as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	Fai ceu three or more days, as long as the ointments corrupt all that is delayed from the hair;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put on the neck a twine of thread some days as long as it is healthy, and if it needs dry medicine, then use it;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, so that one distills the oils and the medicines on the neck:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp opened, like a twine, and lead it also;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you see, then make a closed twine, and be the instrument plain to purify the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and always hold the head so it doesn't move when they heat oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the neck from the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times a disease that is called "telul" appears at the head and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it can be seen with the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	And for this reason you must hold the head still at the beginning and put the fire or burning medicine on it;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay covering it until it is very large, take care if it is hard, of its color, of its poor sense:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	don't ever touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when you cover it up there comes great evil to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of poor color, and you see that it can be completely covered, so cover the patient well with drying and restraining things;
quant li neis est copez et cosus	what the eyes are cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is known that when a solution of continuance comes to one of these cartilage ovulations, it does so little, otherwise in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is therefore necessary that someone come who, if the wound is fresh throughout his body,
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he fixes the two lips to a stitch, and then he cares for it until he is well;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are torn from one side to the other, it is necessary that you peel all their parts until they heal, then join the two lips to a stitch, and tighten them, and powder them with dragon's blood and burned incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put on the powders a piece of resin of some sort or other resin that sticks together, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then care for it with ointment until it is well.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The way to stitch so is that you join the wound:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in stitching the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	ou par fil, if as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	With hands at home, inside the lips there are hard, resembling seeds of times, and small and large;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	Then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut each in two, and take them with pincers and chop them into parts;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the fire after the incision of vitriol, until the blood is stopped;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Often a tooth comes out on the gums, which the old people call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	if it is necessary that you hold it with pliers and cut off the tooth at the root, and let the blood run out;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply the fire of vitriol, or other powdered substances that bind and dry up;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if it returns after the incision, and many times happens, if the cope the second time, and cauterize.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	if it does not return after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments to cope.
des sordens	of the orders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	No joints are assembled to the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and no tooth is black and yellow and rotten, as long as the decay comes to the gum, and the teeth are stinking;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	if you make the patient sit between your hands, and his joints are in your holy place, and expose the teeth or scars as much as possible, so that nothing is delayed;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and then make it black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are clean;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one bone is in the first ratio, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then begin again on the second day and third part, until you have all of them;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that the teeth have different shapes of instruments to cut, according to what the operation shows, because the scissor which one uses to cut hair has other shapes than those which one uses to cut flesh;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others are with you equipped.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you heal the tooth's pain that you wait to draw it out as long as you can, because one should not do this at all;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because it is a substance of high moisture so that one does not have an excuse to draw it out.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	And now when the patient is forced to extract it, you must be certain about the tooth that hurts.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain leaves the patient, and he thinks that the tooth is healthy, and he makes the good tooth drawn out;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and wherever it does not go away with medicine, as long as the evil is removed, because we have already tried to do this for these elderly people;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, so it is necessary that you scorch the gum in all directions with strong spittle;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then dip it in your two hands or small nails at the first hole and hole, until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the nails;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and place the head of the sick person between your knees, and hold him securely so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take one of these tools and push it into each side lightly, and move it around as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	And if it is pierced and blood comes out, fill it with cloth where the hole is;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you hold it tightly with small nails so that it does not break while you are holding it;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it is necessary to cover the wound above the gums so as not to disrupt the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And you should be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and let the patient feel more pain from the root than from the first one.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	And you must not do so in the same way as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through his haste and recklessness, often breaks the chariot, and cannot administer what we have described;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but bring about by the fire of that great disease through the roots which it holds back, or through the chariot which it breaks, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the place with wine or water and string;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and let it dry of blood which comes out, for that often happens, if one employs the place of vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not work, then use fire;
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shape of the instrument which first prepares the tooth is such that it has long points and thick handles so that it does not double up as you draw out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be strong limbs so that they do not bend when pulled, and well-made iron, and let them have teeth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root is still at the trellis, you should put cotton wet with oil on the joint or two, as long as the leg is soft, because the nails that are called "algefri" seem like a 병;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and inside they make like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, then you must take off the whole tooth, and put the instrument that is called 'althali', that is a chisel; this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And be far away from sharp things so that it does not break, and the root jumps because of that, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	If not, if you help yourself with all the tools, by which the forms come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument that has two heads, from which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front in the rasion of teeth, and this instrument which seems a big pliers, whose is this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And be sure that no tool can break it, and know that most of the tools that are inside are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other tools, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the master sages subtlety tries on their own instrument according to what their art and the disease of the patient show them, for there are many diseases or the old man does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the chariot or other bones, or he falls, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, I have told you, and helps with gestures, by which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be big and firmly holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold and remove it.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then return the head to the place of medicine that is suitable for this, and if there is a pus in the bone, and it is small, then the cure with all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural form of the jaw, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the root is attached to the tooth or not; it does not fit into its place, and one cannot nail or file it:
adonques lou raie;	then the extraction:
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is attached to the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is similar to a small pick, and which is made of iron;
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits tight and tight by the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then take a file with this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file from which one makes needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and at intervals rub the tooth with a little water so that it does not move until it comes out.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	Then the plane at the end to any razor, and its density is too hard and it bleeds the tongue, then you should rub the sharp edge until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens...
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the tooth is loose, either by pounding or by pulling, and the patient cannot bear pressure on it without hurting, and you have treated them with restrictives, and that does not help;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	if you can restrain it with a gold wire, for the silver wire turns green and puces, but the gold never moves;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the wire be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you see how to smooth the dense bones, then take the string and double-knot it between the two dense bones, then put the heads between the dense bones, if there are one or more, until you get them smoothly up to the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then start wrapping again until you get to the part where you started, and slowly and carefully remove your hand, so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and make sure that your grip is on the root of the tooth so that he cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then take the heads with pliers, and join them together, and put them between the healthy tooth, and so that he does not hurt his tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it tight as long as it can stay in place, and if it slips or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it stays and serves for all its time, and this is the form of the upper and lower sides, and the appearance of the two upper ribs and the two lower ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when a tooth falls out, if it is put back in its place again and again, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and do not meddle with those who are not wise and patient, and never make the shape of a tooth out of a piece of hay; and put it back in its place where it failed, and hold it fast as we have said, and stay and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the tongue of the language
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Never is there a tongue that comes out of the mouth or nature, which one bears in one's body;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a sore burn;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you open the mouth of the sick person and put your hand on his chin, and hold his tongue down;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	and then cut the nerves long, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its socket, and if there is any hardness or numbness, and this is sudden pain from a wound, so he pulls out the nerve and cuts the ligaments.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be careful that the incision is not too deep, lest the artery be cut.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done so, raise the level of salt water and cool it, then put a patch of linen on the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and rub the disease on each night so that the hole does not close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if fever comes, then put vinegar on the spot.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if it does not go away, then apply fire to the skin with a white hot spark, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat with other treatments until it heals,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see a red or black or hard color so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is leprosy;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is slanting to the left, and there is moisture, then pour the ointment, and wash with a thin sponge, and deliver from one side to the other;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if it does not go to your ointment, put it on vitriol until it is stained, and then return to your ointment while you take all of it;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift up the head from there and from rope, and heal him with other treatments until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	No one should put his finger or hand into his mouth, which are called "godaths", and they are properly called "amandres"; and when you heal them, as we have said in the division of them, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	If the abscess is small and has a pale color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and its root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the removal of blood from the wound;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let it alone until it dies, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is of a pale color and its root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see that the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit in the sun, and his shoulders are parallel to the ground, and he opens his mouth and places his thumb between his hands, and presses his tongue against all the instrument, so it is shaped like this:
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and be of silver or thin gold as well as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	And then press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the scalpel and put it in amber, and drive it up above what you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and then remove any threads with it, then the cover to the instrument, so that this is the form, that seems one's force;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and allways the head are corbed, and one place another, and they are very good, and is made of iron ind or forge:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	If you do not have this instrument present, if you take the handle with pliers, so that there is a form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And let be trenchant on one side, and on other side no;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have covered one of the amber, so cover the other according this same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and cold and easily, and let them rest until they stop bleeding, if gargarize the patient with cooked pomegranate juice, or cooked apple leaves, or similar things, as long as the wound is cleaned;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat until he is well.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and never do any other abscesses in the throat than the two mandibles, unless they are very much like the two mandibles.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman of an abscess that was lying within her throat, that is to say, one small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and I had well closed all the throat, so that the woman could not breathe by the conduit which was stopped up, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had risen two rain-cycles through the two apertures where the drainage was coming from.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened then a little, and put in one of the incisions, then I tore it open again, and put in a large portion of bowstring.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I refitted another part on the other hole where the abscess was, and closed his mouth and pressed his tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after I put the ointment on these abscesses, I poured some of it out, and only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and then I removed the tube from her throat, and now she began to drink water and wine, and I kept cutting this abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess reopened, filling up the space that I had emptied, until it was very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I put a stop to it and cauterized it in her throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	after that it stopped hurting.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and then I left these parts, and only God knows what will happen to them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When the wound heals up, and she is gone and far away, then it is called "perpendicular.
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if she has had a large and round belly, then it is called "ve.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When she is healed as we said in the division, and the healing does not benefit her, and you see that the abscesses are calm, and they are subtle, so it is necessary that you cut them.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and this one who is round and assembled and is not far away;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or a purple color or black, so you avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the eye disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	It is necessary therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its blenching and its length, that you make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have spoken above;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Then place the ring in its hole, and split it open, and cut it with two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cover more, it hurts the throat and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we said in the incision of the two testicles, and heal it until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has doubt about covering; then you must use fire cautery on the painful part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of fire cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts his head in your place, and then he presses the tongue to the instrument that we said or fire cautery, and mixes with sharp vinegar so that it is not too thick or too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use this tool's maneuver, from which comes this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	and put the head in a bunch or hair where one puts the medicine, like the bunches of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the wound;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient be lying on his side, so that his saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that he does not choke in the throat, and burn it;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then keep your hand over all the medicine and press it against the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it become calm and the medicine's stinging is relieved;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see it, take cotton and wrap it over any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and dip the instrument into all the cotton in the chain above, until the cotton dries on the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the fire-cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and see after III or IV days or V;
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to prepare the medicine fire-cautery, if it is prepared, and after the fire-cautery rinse it with cotton soaked in medicine, and clean what is inside of the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be dipped in cold water, and be cured by gargling until it is well;
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This cure is safer than incision, except for cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if she is cured by fumigation in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and yarrow and similar herbs, and put them all together or any of them in a pot, and put it there like this, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot is well glued with strong earth, and dip the tool in this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	and be of silver or gold, and be one of the shoulders squeezed in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the vein through the tube, until the vein is numb;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after it has started again, often, until the vein is dried up, and you keep it from happening at the beginning of the entrance of the abscess, for many things have happened;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not make such a fire that it burns at the base of the apophelis.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a knife and put it in the patient's mouth at the base of the apophelis so that the mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	For the knife of the ape does not make the steam very hot in the mouth, and this is a good treatment that saves both together.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Often there is an object stuck in the throat, or a bone, or nothing.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so that you can take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the object;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and if what is not open for you and has been pushed back into the throat, then you must make the patient vomit so that the meat is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	By chance if the thing disturbs by vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	Or if the patient swallows a sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and he puts it in his throat and then swallows it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, if it disturbe, and then pull hard;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out well from what we have said, then take an instrument to hit according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be bent at the end so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift up the head;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to him, and do not push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and move the patient so that he can breathe, so that the thing does not disturb him;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if the bottle is swallowed, or he draws it out with all the instrument evenly, as long as it is strong.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the fluid from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	No medicine is more important than the one I have mentioned in the division, by the cure of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	And when that does not benefit, then look at the patient's throat in the sunlight, so you can press the tongue to the instrument I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the fluid, if you draw it out with a small hook or tiny claws that are worth nothing.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a knife, and put it in the throat of the patient, then blow on or cut with the blade, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is coughing up water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and let it fall into the throat, and move it from side to side often with his hand;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	And if soon after swallowing the water feels cold, then turn around quickly.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if she does not sneeze as we have said, then make the patient sniff smoke with the instrument I mentioned in the fumes of the wine;
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	do this many times, for it will make her sneeze without a runny nose.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the way of smoking if you squeeze a pot where it has charcoal visible, and let the pot be covered with a coverlet pierced in the middle, and in that perforation is the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	Then pour in your smoking, and let the patient put the head of the cane in his mouth, and close his mouth so that the smoke does not go out, but comes to the blood;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the blood will come now, and if it does not come, then recommence the smoking with many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and suffer the patient to have thirst, and drink salt things and bitter, and do not drink water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it is the duty of healing that he is done by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument to see how it treats the blood, yes, when you can see it, similar to twisted hooks so that they can enter the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and give a look to the beak of care, and I had harshness of lime, so that whoever takes it, she cannot let go;
et vez ci la forme:	and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the scalpels for the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	The shape of the mouth of an abscess is, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and are diverse in piercing and cutting;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and this is in two ways, that one is in its own shape, and of what he holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where they are twisted.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess at the top is different from that at the base, and the abscess at the twisted part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if to abscesses it does not have to pierce, as long as the bow is dead according to its achievement;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if of such that it comes to pierce when it is cut, and do not die according to its achievement, as an abscess which are delicate joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come in delicate joints, and one lets them remain pus-filled inside, by chance if the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	Or the abscess is a delicate limb, and if you delay the piercing as long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	If he is delved down to the foundation, if it is perceived that it is dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not necessary that you pierce the abscess cruelly after having accomplished the digestion, so that the one who is delved down to the foundation does not putrefy completely and remains within, and comes out with a fistula;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in great terms.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And it is necessary that you know the hour of piercing the abscess which is dead according to the accomplishment, and it is when the pain is calm, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and rubor, and the tension and the keenness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and it is necessary that you make sit the piercing or more dependent place of the abscess, and where it opens much;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and the piercing of the long pipe of the heart, and the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and in all even where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those who bleed, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in the flesh, if it pricks let the piercing be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce ahead of this, if you stretch the pipe of its blood, and it is plain of mud of waste;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perhaps the lips become hardened and the depth of it becomes deep.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to which the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small holes;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in great abscesses, great holes, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if at such abscesses it is necessary to cut the kur and cover;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become soft as cloth, and is worn out, if you make it like you make boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if they are of those that are split into three angles, and if they are of those that one also copes with as the skin of the myrtle, like abscesses of arms.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if they are of those for which one makes a ring size, and other sizes and similar copes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who do not have a head, like a superficial abscess, you must pierce it clearly;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a large boil, and you pierce it, if you do not extract all of the boil at once, but extract a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then stop the abscess just until the next day, then extract nothing else primarily;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this again and again with great effort, until all the boil has come out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	usually the disease is of little virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old honourable people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the skin, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and has a great boil, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the boil at once, but draw some part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw no more; do this many times in succession, as the boil comes out completely; but if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman bearing, or small children, or old men decayed.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Begin therefore this treatment with great caution, and when you have pricked your abscess, if the wound is small, wash it.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a long, straight scar, if you apply linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess and there are many ruptures, you must pierce each one with a tent so that they touch each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have torn a part of the skin with the abscess, and you have wrapped it with a cloth, you must fill it with dry cotton or straw of linen without moisture, and bind it firmly for three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply the ointment, and treat with medicine until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is a strong fever that arises from the opening, then administer cold water and do it quickly, and wet the cloth, and place it on the opening many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the blood loss persists, apply treatment and the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a long scar or an abscess that is very painful, you must put linen and towels soaked in wine and oil on them.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in this state, and his legs are fleshy, it is necessary that you dip the blankets in water and oil, or in wine and oil until the third day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then wash the abscess and dry it and heal it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this it is necessary that he recognizes completely in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or you have said to me how one must go before in the treatment of abscesses, and see the paste.
des soros	sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or treat small sores, and they are handled by us so that they are in webs, also as the neck of a goose, and there are many resemblances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There is some that is fat and such where there is also moisture as feathers;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and if it is this kind which is hard and bony at the cutting, and there is no doubt that his artery does not make opposition.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you test all the instrument called "intramuscular", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and it goes up into the long leg.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when moisture is empty, if it scalds nothing the hair which contains that moisture, for it returns immediately as one leaves nothing;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	If not, use water and salve, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and those who have been pricked apply ointment to them, as they are delayed due to nit;
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then dip the cotton again on the second day, and the salve, as long as you know that the nit does not remain;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply ointment to the wound with what is suitable, until it is healthy.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess does not go down quickly according to this form, then cut it;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and throw your scabs, and scorch all parts of it, and put all your treatment outside the coat or where it is;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery is against you, do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make an incision on the abscess if it is painful, and with a scalpel and a curette as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the abscess that is painful and moist, for it is lighter because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if some of these abscesses or head or there is no moisture, and those are the only ones that I saw or head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess as a large, sharp, and white stone, and could not break it;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of them had been cut, one would have done the same wound as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses that come out of the head, they are those that come from the ears and roots of the hair, the opening should be completely closed so that the bow does not get stuck;
et les cure si com il covient.	And treat them as it should be done.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times have they come with abscesses to the throat, and have removed the lumps, and have had boils, and never come to another place or sore, and are rotten, and infected one with another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scab is properly inside its shell, like the nose and abscess on the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And the appearance of these scabs is varied.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malign and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that which you see of good disposition in the chest, and appears similar to the color of the flesh, and is mute from each part and is not attached to the neck neither to the artery nor to the duct, and is not deeply rooted.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	if it is necessary that you chop it from above, and peel each part, and the two lips of the mouth are turned up to one side, if you need it, as we have said in the treatment of the chest with scars.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, nor is there any risk of cutting the tongue or causing a wound that the hands do not escape, and do not look too far ahead, so that you do not cover anything you are not supposed to.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to sew it, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the blood, and draw the wound out.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscesses are calm, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood has stopped flowing, if you return to your work, as long as you finish it off;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then inspect your little finger for any small bumps, if there are none, scrape and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is great root of the scar, then it only comes to scrape that scar in its root, but let it hang by a strong thread, and let it fall without any harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then employ cotton wool dipped in olive oil, then clean it up.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you catch the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, so that there is no delay because of its great size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and draw it out firmly, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	These scars that have excess fluid, pierce where it is opening and dying;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce in the same way as that which is said before, depending on, then I spread tendres with olive oil and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are delayed from corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well dressed, if the healing ointment comes into contact with it, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke of the treatment of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have laryngitis, it is necessary that the opening of the throat called "epiglotte" be removed;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and do not use this, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are hot in his mouth or throat or in two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the vein of the neck, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the strangulation which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we want to remove the epiglotte, we should make a cut of three circles or four small cuts from the edge, between the two circles or by the quantity of the cut in the cartilage; do not cut it in the cartilages.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if their lips are not suitable for cutting the epiglottis, there is no char, and the vessels are long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to the very end, and then cuts the meat as far as it comes to the cheekbone.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then apply the salve, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is proven by the cutting of the vein of the cheek which sprouted from the place that was broken, and by the loss of speech.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the open wound as a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed by which one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the meat, and the whole shoulder under the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and administer medicines which cause a growth of hair, as long as he is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: 'Do not make this cut until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the failure causes him to lose his voice.'
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then wrap the epiglottis around it so that the patient cannot move it, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and to command the elder to leave the wound open as long as the disease is gone, and it has passed in three days or four. And then he commanded to stitch up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a damsel take a knife and put it in her throat, and she cut through the chisel of the pommel;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to heal her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and I knew well that she had not cut a vein or an artery; the blood came forth from the mouth because of the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed the wound, and healed it until it was well;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and didn't come to the damsel except she was red in color, and returned after her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I fear that in cutting off the epiglottis there will be no pain.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	the abscesses are called "gastric hernias", and there is a large abscess in the color of a mustard seed, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and is according to two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	natural, and accidental;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	where nature has no fault.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one is according to two ways, of which one seems like fat to us, and the other way seems like an abscess that comes from our arteries;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and he has fear, and it is not good to operate on fire without first making sure of the small one, and testing and searching all the instruments;
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you know how to fix it like I don't know how, and can't do anything at all, if the cup, as we use cups, and treat him with everything he needs, if there is any left.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And look well after it, and treat it properly, so that it is completely cured.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	And it is necessary that I say all the differences there are between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that dislocation is hot and fiery, as long as the fever has passed and the blistering is done;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and the heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the cup there is no heat or fever or pain, and it heals itself, which is its own sac, and it begins as a scar, and becomes bigger;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and according to two appearances, either grass, or moist, and much of a color are so as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat our condition, you must first test and inquire about all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to their form or the paste that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way of testing the abscesses is that you press out or more moist liquid than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs little by little until you feel that the instrument has penetrated, then stop according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the instrument, and take care not to hurt yourself.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	if it runs quickly with moisture, which color it has, then do the same as I said for the other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, so do it in a cross shape and take it with tweezers, and scrape it slightly from each side and save the cot or where it lies;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out piece by piece so that nothing stays behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if there is a little bit of it, and it does not cause you pain, then employ some corrosive water to extract the wound, and put something soothing on it, and give it other treatments until it heals;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is large, cut off the two corners of the wound, and treat what causes it to hurt;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the vein is opposite or another way, then hurry and employ the place of vitriolic broich, and let it stand for two or three days until the wound festers, and rest the blister in the blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to copper what has been left behind by the blood.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the intruding instruments, and they are of three manners:
grans et moien et petit;	large and mean and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three quarters that are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and they are of three manners:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, mean, and small, so as to encircle the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles used to count sorceles, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are made of yellow brass are more proven to sound black, so as to encircle the corbiculae of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three manners:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, mean, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of the hooks are of many appearances, as you will see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, small, and tiny
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if one has three corbecs of three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if one has three corbecs, and are also of three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if one has two corbecs, and once of a corbec, and are of three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all of these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these should be sharp, and of some I have who only cut from one side, so that when you skin them, you can cut the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introducers are the alems replied in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and don't use any but if in its place like legs, arms, mammary glands, and shoulders, and similar places;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never make any other instrument small, resembling scurf of blisters, according to this form, so that one does not burn with fire:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	The chief of these cuts are sharp, and some do not cut more than one side, from which we peel the skin so that we do not touch the vein or nerve; and these intrusions are placed in many ways, so that the patient does not lose them when opening the abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and middle, as you see; and we use them only in the leathery part, as legs, arms, mammary glands, and arms, and similar things; and never do we make another instrument small, resembling blades, according to this form, so that we stop the blood:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	The breasts of some men become inflamed when they are infected and appear like the breasts of women.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and those who must treat them, if it is appropriate according to this form of that line: b. g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scratch the fat, and apply medicine to the wound by wrapping it, then join the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if his breast falls down, and becomes soft because of its size like a woman's, if it is made into two ridges on top, by two resembling clefts:
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	from which one is held by the other at the end of one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line. b . g .;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then peel off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the evacuation of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton impregnated with an astringent;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the remaining skin and fat has dried up, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the hips of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The pustules that come from the glutes are handled with care or they have ribs, and if there is only one that contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all of the bow that is in the pustule is empty, then employ cotton wool, and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healthy:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the pustule is like a wart, then cut it as we have said in cutting warts, and if there is bow in the wound, then apply fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is torn and the skin that is above it is tightened, then many abscesses come, and also they go to the escaped vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if the incision is deep as much as for the artery, if it is long the abscess completely.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel extraction.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, if it is to be cut apart.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, and most of all when it is dislocated in the armpit and in the throat and in other places, and there are many.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore it is convenient to remove the cure of iron, and that which is at the top also has to be removed, and in that which is swollen with an artery, do so from above the skin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then operate the waist like one person, and separate the artery from the threads well, until it is uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then stick in one needle, and make it pierce up to the other side, and extract the artery with a double thread according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	and then point to the place that is between the two ties of an intromitter as long as there is no tie there, and loosen the aphistma.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the cure for a bowel rupture as long as the link remains intact;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat with oil coming from the wound as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the aphistma is the size of a vein, then you should take oil from your hand that you can get to the aphistma on all the skin, then remove the needle from its place where you hold it in your hand, and let it pierce, and it has two threads, so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tighten the aphistma, as I told you, or the link of one of the two parts to the other with two threads;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then he will take another needle at all the threads from the incision of the first needle, and pull out the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess as much as the excess is released, then cut the excess with the curette and leave what is attached;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then wrap him in a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply tent remedies and spices as long as he is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	as they come out in the artery and in the vein, they come out in the kidneys when they are wounded, or through too much toil, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And if it happens more often with the shoulder joints and two legs or at all where there are joints, and this is a grieve abscess, and its color seems to be the color of the flesh, and many people are in pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when they are restrained so that the patient feels pain, and is not completely healed yet, but let the cure continue;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and does not move well in any way, and does not go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and what is in joints should not be cut with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	in case there is a contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and if it is at the head or at the forehead, make the skin with the sponge.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, and if he has a pimple, and copes it in its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the sore has hair, and skin it, then bone it and sew the wound up, and let it heal until it is well.
des grosses boces pendans	of the large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	No time has come when there is a wart in the belly or nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance, and its root is fine, and its head is large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and of little and great moisture;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw two homes where there were two warts that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I measured them and found one to weigh 18 ounces, and the other 6 Z. (possibly a unit of measure for weight), and the incisions so that you notice that the patient is moist, and the color of the arteriole is pale and moist and has a fine root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If it is large with a wide spatula, and let the fire cautery be in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For when the tail comes out with great pain, and it leaves you, then hasten to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	And if you see the patient in pain and frightened by the iron incision, then take a piece of string well made, and bind the arteriole as we have said, and let it be for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then restrain it, and do not cease to remove the string from the arteriole as long as it copes with the string, and move it a little by its own motion;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, so be afraid of the coppers at once for the belly, but you put them well coppers half, then cautery that it does not come back;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then heal the wound, and keep so you do not coppers the tangle which is of fuchs color and poor scent and milk regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess to which I will come in the treatment of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the breast is inflamed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes by cautery of wound or cut of syphi, and is on the belly and there are some of the boils, as it happened in other ruptures, or of blood which cuts from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is by the rupture of the syphi and by the issue of the boil, if the color of the abscess seems like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the outlet of the intestine, then there are many things, and when one presses it with his two hands, so that he repents, and then returns, and perhaps he is caught, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is because of moisture, it is a light thing, and open well when you press it to your hand, do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is because of blood, let it open by these signs, the thick and hard abscess, and let it be placed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is because of windiness, if it is hot at the touch, and the opening if it is that you look at its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is appropriate that you leave the healing.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you, or chapister apomes, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is for the intestine or loins, then it is necessary that you command the patient to tie his loins, and be stretched out straight, and then sign with your hand all around the loins;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to walk slowly between your hands, then go into the place that you have signed all around the loins, then extend the half of the abscess from above to all the large nail;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	and then tie the foot with a strong thread or a strong silk rope tightly, and let us bind it up.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then operate on half of the appendix extending on the thread, and with your index finger press the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it stuck to the thread, then loosen it, and press the intestine towards the inside of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it with a blade, and cut off the surplus;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein is against it, or if you have pricked it deeply, then go back to your work and take two needles, and thread them with two strong threads, and tie them up tightly where you made the hole that you made pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the appendix in four places on the needles, and if you see it, then remove the needles, and leave it there until it is rotten, and let the dead flesh drop off;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	Here is the translation of the first sentence: 
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And extract the blood where you see moisture, then treat the joint of what it touches, and weld the joint.
dou chancre	Dou Chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken about the appearance of leprosy, and how one should act with medicine, and how one should avoid curing with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and let the leper go in the marris, and great care in the cure, and tell the old that when leprosy is in a limb or breast as leprosy is in meat, and in soup, and in similar foods, and it must all be cut off when it is in trouble;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when he is large and old, so it does not come to me, for I never heal him;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one ever heals before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the shoulder, when it is in a limb where it can be cut off, as we have said, is that you do not purge any evil of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	and then make him better if he has a manifest fullness, and then, made the patient comfortable to do the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then put on them your scabs or sores, and the hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and compress the place well with your hand or with anything, and if the blood stops flowing, cauterize it until the skin is burned;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal him with other medicines as long as he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of droopsie
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and in what way the gathering of the water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made by medicines, and that which is cured by iron:
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only a fever;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one must not touch iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	this is to say, tympany and hypothermia, for it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	so then when you treat this case of edema which is called "ecolthes" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides edema, such as flatulence and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if one does not touch iron, for there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient of great vigor, and he has no other disease besides edema alone, and he is not too old or too young, then one must act thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lay the patient down straight on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen at the lower part of the belly, then take the spatulum with thorns according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	and be cut in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	a point, and wherever it is not so deep that it might enter up to the intestine when it is put in, and not be able to be hurt.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then see if there is dropsey [a medical condition where excess fluid collects in the abdomen] there above the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is convenient that you cut them up from the back of the neck three fingers wide straight down on the breastbone;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if dropsey [a medical condition where excess fluid collects in the abdomen] is there because of a liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the back three fingers wide straight down on the breastbone;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is because of the wind, then it should be on the right side, and it is not convenient that the patient lie on his back on the cut so that the excesses do not run to the weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and stretch it out, and hold your hand at the back of the neck from the skin to the spine as much as the length of an index finger or more;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Then pierce the lozange until the spit comes out of its hole, and this is the place of the water, then the more it is hard, and it bottles this instrument from which thus is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	It is like an elegant silver spike, and it is made of bronze or lightweight iron, and in its upper portion there is a small opening;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and where it is bent on one side, there is an opening;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other side, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head is cut off like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feather with:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top of the instrument, so that when this instrument comes into contact with water, it drops immediately onto the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	then make it half or a third full, because if you fill it more than that at the time, perhaps the patient will die from the loss of his spirit by the removal of his weapon, or he will faint, or come close to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its hair mean;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then train the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held now by the curb that stops the hole that is above the wound, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then begin again with the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering from that, and train a small quantity of water;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do not do this again for one day, and guard against making too much of it as long as there is no delay but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave a little water for him, if his cure is in the earth or in the sand hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if he gets tanned from drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment of desiccative medicines until he is well, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stop of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born with an imperforate penis, or if it is perforate, it is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary that it should be perforate at all, very subtle skin should be used according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put on him a thin cloth of linen, and tie it and hold it like this for III days or IV and when it begins to urinate, so take off the cloth, and let him urinate, and then put it back on;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance do not understand at all, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the cloth closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The hole of the piercing is opened with medicine made from clove oil, as we have said, if it widens.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the pertus in their proper place are blistered, because no one is born who has the pertus at the top of the penis, so that he cannot urinate before he raises his penis up;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot get pregnant because the material does not come out until it reaches the navel, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the way of the opening is that the patient lies down on his back, then the head of the penis and the cup are like the size of a quill, so that the piercing comes in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful of the loss of blood that often comes, and if it happens, let the wound be staunched, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	of the wart
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often there comes an ugly scar on the penis, and it is a hideous sight;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and of evil and good;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	if you squeeze them with subtle strength, and wrap them and clean them all up, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment in a bandage;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wound with Diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the wart is malignant, of a pale color and dripping, you must apply fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have wrapped it up, and the scar is in the middle of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then remove the wrap that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when he is solid, if the doctor goes away.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you join it together, if not firmly secured, the joint of the penis may be pierced, and blackness and corruption comes to its penis and scrotum;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	if it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then bind on the plaster of honey and flour which is made from pomegranate skin and seeds, then cure with other remedies until it is healed;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if blood flows from the injury, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cures should be combined in two ways:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	For blood evaporation, and for corruption:
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the joint of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, you must bind or lead the penis with a cord, and let the patient urinate;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair has grown out at the tip of the penis that has not yet been circumcised, or where there is an abscess or an ulcer, it is necessary that you scrape with a scraper instrument as long as the bonds are loosened, and the joint of the penis is freed from all sides;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is a painful thing to devise this, then you must scrape it with the spetumile of the root of the penis and the scrotum.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then cut deeply between them, and put a fine linen cloth wet in cold water on it immediately, so that it does not burn quickly.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	circumcision is not a dislocation of continuance if as other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	however when we perform this operation of our own will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest work for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have it only because we have acquired it by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have heard the greatest part of the masters and the most honorable who performed circumcision around the balls, and with force, and all a new thing;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	If it is done with two threads, and by chance one of them breaks, then the skin may hang down and delay the work.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or the recovery of the cup, and it is doubled pain, and to the purification which is there from the hole is not assured the point of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and to the purification of the nail by accident escapes the wound, and corrects the work, and many times it comes up that there is no need for purification and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the mouthwashing that is made so well on all the body of man I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly in L all parts stretch;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the string be well tighten around the leather;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not tie the string too tightly around the stick, and then you make it rest in all ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make it lie straight between your hands, and resound the beats between your hands or shut your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	and dip your hand to the root and blow on it, and tie it up high as long as the head of the root is;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	Then wash it well with dirt that has gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it to the other one;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it by the second thread to the thumb and to the index finger, and place between the two threads, then remove the cautery from above carefully and tie the head of the root;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, because it is the bleeding;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder I wrap with a piece of cooked egg yolk dried with rose water, mixed with good oil and fresh herbs, and let it sit for another day, and the healer treats it as long as he is well;
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the cure for this disease is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The two bones should be soft and rounded, and the joints equal in length to each other.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the mistake in the cure if it is when the curative fluid escapes from the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then you must extend it to your fingernail so that the incisions form an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and make it even, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then make it even.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	If it lasts three days, and that which is sore at the root of the penis is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess has dried up, and then scalds it lightly;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	if you can move it as you please, and keep away from the part near the root of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure also the powder that causes bleeding, which we have spoken of in our treatise on powders, and if applied too vigorously, it may cause injury to the upper part.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore, as we have said, as long as he is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	retentence of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The holding back of urine is due to the extraction of stones from the urinary tract, or to frozen blood, or to bowels, or to a similar thing, which we have spoken of in our discussion of the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not eliminated, and you see a stopping due to a stone in the urinary bladder or at the base of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be made to bend on his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let him put the stone on his back, and extend his abdomen from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he lies as flat as possible;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then forces the collar of the bladder to express itself on top of the stone, so that the urine is discharged;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must bring the instrument called "syringe" to
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and be of fine light silver, like the feathers of an owl;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and be of a long and half palm size, and be sharp at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the tip with a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the tip into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and fill the excess of the wool with oil or butter and linseed oil, and insert the tip into the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and linseed oil, and make the patient sit on a chair, and lubricate the bladder and the penis with moist oil of olive and water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	Then hold the syringe lightly to the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then twist the penis over the bowl.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	Then pour the syringe up to the bladder, and let the urine go into the empty thing, and it is not done in this order unless you are taking it away where it goes.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	Then tie the thread to all of the wool piece by piece, and let the urine follow the wool, then remove it, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and start the syringe again until the bladder is empty, and keep the patient calm.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the scorbut or blisters come to the bladder, and it is assembled together, and you see it distilling water and medicine, if done with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It's over, and if at third attempt:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	On one side, and on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	And the hair is cut so that the medicine does not stick well to the penis, if there is moisture, and it is pushed when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you take your medicine out of the bladder, place the head of the cautery in the moisture, and treat with the treatment that follows.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you pull the moisture onto the cautery, and then quickly twist the treatment that follows;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters in, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema, from which one enemas the bladder:
si est ci:	if so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	is made of silver or oak; and the shoulder is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and is tied to the breast or the neck;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture that you saw to prepare the enema into it, then tie it between the two breasts with a good double thread of string, and heat the bladder's moisture on the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Then pour the wine in the chamber of the scrotum, then draw your hand over the bladder to all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle on it, and pierce it roundly.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then pour in a strong liquid into these cavities, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tapestry, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said in the division of the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I said the difference between the stone within the body as rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work with a chisel;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis.
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone that is lodged in the bladder often appears in children, and this is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder to the thin part of the kidney.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and I cut off, and rub the patient's penis, and then wipe it many times, and then anoint it;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and at the root of these movements, the foundation;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and light is the healing of children until they are four years old, and great sorrow is in the elders, and at middle age is much trouble, to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the treatment of these who have a large stone is lighter than that of these who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the cure, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with a hot bath, in order to draw out all the pus that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For he does not bother at any time to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet and turn him upside down and move him so that the stone comes out of the bladder completely, and never cut from above;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	and set him to sit between your hands unclothed, and his hands shall be on his thighs, so that the bladder hangs down all the way to his ankles;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then question and touch inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut it off from the bone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not slip when touching all over, then wet your index finger with oil from your left hand, because the disease is incurable, or your right hand, because the disease is completed and accomplished.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and pour it down into its foundation, and question the stone, and when you feel it with your thumb, so that the urine comes out at the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press on it with your thumb, and pour it out at the place where you see it cut off.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the bladder toward his hand, and command him to extend his right hand up over the testicles, and his left hand underneath the skin that is above the testicles in the part where circumcision is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	and then I pour the sputum by pouring, so this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make a space between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but next to the left side of the womb;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be right up against the stone, and your two be close to the fundament, and be the size of the stone, not too big;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	so that the press if what is between the loins, so that it does not work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is some stone where there are angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	so it is cracked;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if there is some that is soft, like a ball, and round, whose exit is light:
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	So then where it has angles and edges, make the size bigger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, then you must extract it with pliers that are like a file on the head, so that the stone does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you put a small, sharp instrument into the ear;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot do this thus, then let it be broken with a sharp instrument and if it is corroded, then extract it with vinegar;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then first remove the largest one from the bladder neck, then cut it off, and the small ones after, if there are any more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If the stone is large, it should be made into a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or his urine comes out again because the head cannot close properly;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless you must try to extract it, or to break it with pliers, piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have finished your work, employ the ointment of cinnamon and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put on top of it a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to calm the abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then wash the patient's neck, and do not remove the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if the oil and water are very well separated, then the cure of the wound with astringent and balmy ointments until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses come into the wound and putrefactions of blood in the bladder, and hold back the urine, which is conveyed in some way so that it does not flow with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then put some dry salt in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and spill it out.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then raise the wound with water and sand and earth, and aid it in all ways that you can, until it is healthy;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the hours that you cure him, you bind his two legs, and gather the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	If the stone is small, and he is taken out of the bladder with a stick and pushed in, and his urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the cure for this, that I have said above, that you cut it many times, is not sufficient to cure him, then you excuse the cutting because of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron, forge it according to this form, and make it into three angulated pieces of iron rod.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and bind it around the root of the bladder so that it cannot come out;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then pour the urine into the bladder lightly, until it comes out to the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and return the blade to your hand in the bladder little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if the urine comes out soon, then press your hand on him who is held back by the stone in his bladder.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	If it is immediately bruised, and jumped with urine, and is cursed the patient;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	And if you cannot do this for any reason that harms it, then I will file the stone and the other above, then cut the verge between the two lines, then extract it firmly, and clean the frozen blood which is in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It happened that a stone was stuck in the bladder of a woman, and if it ever happened, this is a painful cure, and is attacked by three things:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that per adventure the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that we cannot find a woman who is able to disclose it to the mirages, even if she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third way is that per adventure we cannot find a woman who is skilled in this art of hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth method is that the stone of the woman is more perfectly than the stone of the man, because it requires a deeper incision and there is great fear. And if this is necessary, you should call on a woman who knows well, and do not pull her hair, and if you do not pull her hair, do not ask for her to cut it;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and the present a good ballade in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do that which you command with respect to the extraction of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look well whether this woman is a virgin;
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then it is necessary to put his finger or foundation and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she pulls it out, she should hold her finger or hand firmly, and recommend to her that she puts her right hand on the bladder with her left hand.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she pees, then it is necessary that she move it from the bladder's entry to the anus, as far as it comes to the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the bone in the root of the thigh against the middle where it is moved apart, and feel the bone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move her back up the bone or anus, and make the cut first small;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then pour the rain into the pelvis, if you feel the bone so close to the wound as much as the bone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of bones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	That is to say, small and large ones, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rained.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the appearance [of the stone], then you will know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if he does not come out, then put it in vinegar, and keep it for an hour as long as the stone is being strained;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	and return to your work, as long as the stone is far away, and have the tools that I told you about for the extraction of the stone to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it goes out from you, and it is the artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the place and extract it little by little and by degrees, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, except by accident, so that the patient does not die;
puis cure la plaie.	and then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire is gone from the wound, and the blood stands, if it returns to your work, as long as the stone is far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	The water that is used for washing is nothing but a mixture of moisture or white wine, which helps to release the joints, which are contained in the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and is called "syfac", and is not properly in the shell of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and this is the leather of the loins between the white syph that we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	if it does not come out.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this Ramie is so weak that it comes from the testicles, and this substance spreads.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And if this comes out with the percussion on the loins, and this moisture happens to many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or is it declining to yellow, or is it without red, black, or white water, and this happens more;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of conio-isthenic assemblage, for if it is or white that we have said, if it is the reons of an aposteme, I poc long as much as the figure of an O that does not open the loins, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then it is the reons of an aposteme with a part of the uve, and for this reason one thinks that it is another uve;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white muscle, then he feels warm.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	So that when you know the color of the moisture, try on all the lower part of it, since its shape is as follows.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this, and what comes after the insertive quarter, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat them with fire, so that the patient becomes well according to his power and the replenishment of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then make him lie on his back on something a little high, and put over him many blankets;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then make him sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant that he sits on his right side, and extend the stick to one of the two ribs at the bottom of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula, and peel off the skin of the testicles among the long hair down to its root, and make your cut completely straight while removing the skin of the testicles little by little, according to his power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	Then pierce the hole of water at a great height and drain all the water, and then put your fingers in it, and lift up the water.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the curve of the finger, but let the water fall alone.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Take it all or piece by piece separately from him subtly, so that if you do not take it well washed, the water will come back.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	And if the egg was stolen from your work, if you put it back in its place when you have finished the work of the water;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then join the two fingers of the hand together at a joint, and bandage it up as you would do with other wounds until it is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by some disease, then it is necessary that you hang the vessels that are suspended, in doubt of the decay of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And then take hold of the coccyx with all the suspender, and extract the uvula, and clean it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if it is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are its branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you do the other part likewise as you did the first one, then wash the blood away, and put in the wound another wet thing made of oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put away another woolen cloth wet in wine and oil, and put it on both coccyxes, and cover with doubled sheets, and tie it all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two sheets, and fill them with wool according to this form and join them together by stitching in the throat of the breeches, and one of the heads should rest on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hand;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two on the two arms, and all is gathered up in the loop of the breastplate;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never is medicine this fire cautery in place of iron size, and it is that you squeeze the cautery with a sharp tool, and scrape the skin of the feet, and is heated as we said, so that the white plague that contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	if you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce it with a sharp tool, and burn it with this fine cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	and coat it in all ways that you can, until you scrub everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and keep the fire from touching the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and knows that this work is more safe;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and maintains the prevention of blood loss, and keeps the work of ironing;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if there is nothing that contradicts it, or an abscess of blood or another thing, then treat what contradicts you, according to what the one who is in front says.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this work because of its horror, then provide a perforation, as I told you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs that we have said that the ramose water is there, then place the patient on a raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the part of the back to all the broad spine, and put the perforation from long the neck;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and make the opening wide so that all the water runs out quickly;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton in the place, and bandage it, and leave to run the remaining water, then treat as the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you put there a feather or the instrument with which one treats the water of the dropsical, from which the form is as described above;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and open the wound wide, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after six months or so, and when it is gathered as before, and in this way the patient will get better day by day.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this essay there are many different arrangements, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come from the belly, and most often from the bowels;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is known by bitter and water that is spread into the bowels, or from impact;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess according to the color of the bone;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and do not prick at the pain, and the abscess is painful;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and perhaps an abscess is painful and piercing, and of pus, and never comes out of a vein, or swells up from a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is out of a vein, if it is hot by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not suffice that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	What is done by swelling up from a vein is known by its position in relation to the touch with the fingers, and one can do well in making the incision on this appearance, and on the other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and that you take care of the tips of the fingers, then the pain is in the top, and the tremor of the white part is clear, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the finger;
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already well cooked with these new charred pieces, then it is necessary that you take the egg and break it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	And if it is caught in the sieve, or in any of the vessels that are inside, then it is necessary that you release all those that are held, and break them up well.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the dislocation is at the back of the shoulder, you must reset the entire joint and remove the cause, as we have already described.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are healed, then bandage the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess surrounded by a covering that looks like a bug, with the softening of the tissues, and the patient groans painfully when it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	And the treatment for this disease is very similar to what we have mentioned above, and we will tell you everything about the work of it, according to what the old one did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a soft seat, and then pour the water from the tissues down his throat with both hands, all the way to the vessel that is closest to the penis, and wash it well, and spread it out smoothly.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	And cut with the spetum, a sharp instrument, through the thick part of the veins, until they are completely exposed, and then peel off each piece, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	And then put an awl with two threads and tie it to the first loop where the vein has come together, and quickly tie it to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then cut them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then treat the wound as you would with abow, so that no vessel bleeds from one of its ends;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this nothing comes, and all the vessels come together, so that you can pull the ends of all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the blood does not run out from the incision of the vessels and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphyl
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disease are either due to the sectioin that occurs or the extension on the belly in the part of the kidneys, because the intestines descend from that wound into one of the caissons.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this cut is either due to the sectioin or the extension of it, and these two ways come from similar causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from impact, or from jumping, or from yelling, or from pain caused by something raised, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is due to the extension from the cut, if it is little and little, slowly and slowly, and does not suddenly come;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscess is even until nearly at its top, so that the cut does not press on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to a cut of the syphyl, that sudden pain appears, and the appendages appear different, as if they were going out of the skin, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body away from the syphyl.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never let the intestines twist around the colon; otherwise it will be held back and cause great pain to the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of iron to remove fear, so that it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the opening so that you command the patient to keep the intestine in his hand inside the wound, if he can withdraw it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	And then put yourself on his neck between your hands, and loosen the ties.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then take off the coat from above, and cut off all the skin of the back longwise.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then place it face down on the table and cut open the skin from the waist down according to what you need to open the wound, and be careful not to hurt him.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	Then peel off the skin from the back, making sure that the raw flesh is completely exposed and dry on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	Then place your index finger in the space between the skin and the raw flesh that is exposed from the back, between the white skin that has come off the skin of the back, and between the second skin, and from behind the spine, and between the second skin;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and as you move your right hand inside the coat between your shoulders, take the white skin that has come off the back and put it on your left hand, and loosen the spine all around the wound;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command to the minister that he extend the feather upward, and undo what is behind the ligature;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and examine your two sides if there is any wrapped or white fecal matter, and if you do not find anything, pour it into the abdomen;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take an needle or has a thick thread made of X threads, and pour it into the behind part of the fecal matter, which is after the skin of the anus;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after the cut, then cut the threads that appear from the feces, until there are four threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then assemble them one above the other in a cross shape, and tie the fecal matter, which we have said is after the skin of the anus, with a strong knot on two sides;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the threads around the feces and tie them together in two places so that no part of the anus can enter, and let the abscess not come out;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and then very strictly the string according to the first string long II is of that, and after these II strings leave a syfac who is desoz the cure of the côins the great of a day;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and then all the others according to the rondesce that the euf carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then cut in the part which is desoz the leather of the côins, until it is no longer deformed, and let it bow, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	and then bring wet wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and let the string that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white blood that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leaves the string as long as it does not stick to itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in the cheoir, so be raised by a hot water, and put on that we have said, as long as it does not stick;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old one said that it is done so as the vine which is bound together, in such a way that you tie the vials, after cutting on the thigh lightly on the sole;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut it off, and heal the abscess of him who has operated, until the vials bleed;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and heal it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No time comes when there is a rupture in the arteries, as we have said, and open the veins;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and do not let any of the bowels come out as pieces, and if they do, it is little, and repair every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and in any case if it stays too long in this place, if the wound or gangrene believes, until the bowels come out;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and if there is extension of the wound that is in the angles, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and swollen and opened its places;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the healing process if it is by cauterization, as we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and never is healed in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and he lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the wound with a broad blade according to the quantity of three;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then remove the skin that is under the tissue that has come off, and then take a thread and tie it on the place that appears of the wound;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then he presses well the belly, then sews the two places that appear of the wound on the top of the thread, and sews both;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	and then remove the thread, and do not cover the wound nor extend the ulcer nor any other thing, as I have told you in the healing of the intestine;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	and treat with cure for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you sew the wounds, if the wound is cured, do so until it has healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The wound-healer is necessary, and has no appearance in the laceration, and the fire-cauterization is damped at this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the cod
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the skin of the testicles is softened in some men, because the balls that are inside are softened, and can be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	And it is necessary, when one curates him, that one make circumcision of the male member with a knife, and cut off the skin that is softened on the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	Then join the two lips with one stitch, and cut off the surplus of the softened skin at three stitches or four firmly;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Then sew between the stitches, and treat it like the other wounds, until it is healed, and cut off the thread.
dou chastrement	Dou chastrement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that chastisements are not included in our law, and for this reason I do not want to speak about them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary only for two ways:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	that one is that the mirrour in his sickness answereth when it is asked of him, and in his cure.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, for since we have often had to chastise some beasts to help us, as goats and sheep and hogs and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say therefore that chastising is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by pulling either by cutting
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In that which we do with attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water, until the coccyx is softened and still;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then with your hand press them, until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the chastising of the tail:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	it is necessary that you take the beast, and press the skin of the tails to your left hand, then tie the suspension, and pull on each eye with a hook when you have well scorch them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and I leave no little pot of medicine and subtle medicine that is over the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of cauterizing is milder than that which is done by attraction, for in attraction something may stick to the wound, so that the best lust is satisfied;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then heal the wound as long as it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermaphrodite is according to two ways as men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two joints open like a woman's figure, so that it has hair, and sometimes in cort the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is in women, and on the head of the penis also as a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the cure for man and woman is that you rub the joints together, and cure them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second way, of men whose urine jumps out through the skin of the joints, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenticle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigo is a joint that sticks to the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	And some women have used it great as a hand, and this is the remedy.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you take the surplus of the toxin from your hand or fingers, and wipe it lightly with a cotton swab.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not cut too deep, that the blood does not run much, then heal with another cure as long as it is healthy;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and at another time that is born in the mouth of a cow, and employs it, and perhaps it is bad, and it is according to the appearance of a cow's disease, and for this they called him the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said with the toxin, and heal it until it is well.
de erratique	de erratique
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic is when the nature of the woman has not yet been discovered, or the hernia is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is natural by birth, or happens by disease that comes;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or is it through a foreign body, or subtle poison or spice, and is made perfect in the womb, or in the coast, or in the breast, or wherever;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and to understand conception, and childbirth, and perhaps flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the understanding of this is by the aspect of the face.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If it is close to appearing, if you want to know with your two hands or your right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is soft and subtle medicine, and it is near to the liver, if you hurry and put it in there quickly:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two fingers together, and the woman is on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then are the two kidneys formed, until the soft subtle medicine runs, and covers the stench;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, and soak it in oil, and put it on the place, and let the woman lie with everyone every day, so that he cannot stand.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the remedy is tough and thick, then you should chop the plant-like spaulding with a scythe.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stench is from a horse, then hang it by the neck and cover it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have the medicines that stop the stench, as in this case, of dragon's blood, incense, together with a lot of oil;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then provide a broad blade, so that the wound cannot close;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it remain for a long time, and provide a dry cloth;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other remedies until he is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the mare becomes pregnant, if it is covered in this way, then an abscess will not form.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For if an abscess forms on the mare, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Emorrhoids are openings of veins for which without surgical operation, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become tender;
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have said in the division the signs of heat, and the symptoms, and I will say here those which respond to cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thigh, when they are fully grown in the marrow, and do not appear to the touch unless it be by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the marrow can be felt, they are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then bind the tender parts to the scales, and cut off at the roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, as if it were due to heat and dragon's blood and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then pour water on its feet against the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if the fever comes, then let the medicine be made with a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confect it with honey and so forth, and make an ointment out of it to put on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	Or if not, then let him have hot towels on his back and not hurt the skin;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take another, and moisten it with juice of plantain or of oak apple, and apply it to the sore spot.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has healed, then let him stop applying ointment once he is well.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	And that which is called "balathyr" is red, and looks like a sharp lance, then cover it as I have said before.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat him until he is well.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Various types of abscess can occur in the breast, such as syphilis, piercing abscess, herpes, écoulement, fistules, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is necessary that I say in this treatise about the abscess that comes in the breast, which is not an abscess that hurts only;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you can see the heat of iron, if you look at the abscess when it is beginning to come, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red, then you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die while the pain is relieved;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then put the patient on a bed, and have two small chairs where he leans his legs, and support his feet in different directions from the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let their hips be spread apart, and put their arms out on their knees, and bind them well with a good rope;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then suck the bite toward the right side of the mouth, and I bring the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the breast, so that afterwards it comes into form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you see this instrument used, that you place the ring first in order to know the depth of the wound, so that what enters into the instrument does not come out imperfectly and does not wound the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the instrument does not harm the patient.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument above, and that he darken the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess opens, and you hold it with your hand, if it is necessary to cover the tip, at the spittle's base;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the bowels are empty, if you put wet cloths in the wound soaked in rose oil or dry green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and dip the tent of the wound in the marsh all the way to the bottom, and dip the other end on the top of the hand above the knuckle, wet with water or cooked wool.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then the healer after two days of poultice coming to this, as long as it is well;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and no more raise the marsh and the wound by a hot water and honey poultice, and then water or roots of flowers and arnica are cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then recover to the poultice.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has closed over the bone, you must not cook it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the chapter on wounds.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	Artisan is first at the birth that it knows the shape of natural birth, and the signs if you see the woman rushing down, and desires to smell the air.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the child rushes to come out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then you know that these births are according to the natural shape, and the first one comes out with his head, and the second with him;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, if it is convenient to press lightly his belly, so that the baby comes soon;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	For when he defecates on top of his head, if the second one is with him, and is washed out by good purification;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For it never comes on its feet, and comes from the neck or shoulders, and the hands, or sometimes on his belly, or often, and is transformed by accident on his throat, and by other bad shapes;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	So it is necessary for the dance to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how to help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the baby comes on top of his head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth to grief, and his virtue is weak, then the fair one sits on a saddle, or the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and then made of it an oil or fenugreek is boiled, and then poured between the two small spatumiles which are here the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and then split the second one, and cover with his nail until the moisture that is inside comes out.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press on the woman's belly until the baby comes out, and if it does not come out, then it is necessary to use a muscle- relaxing paste of fenugreek oil with sise-seed oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then make her lie down and cough, and keep her mouth and nose covered for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	now let the baby come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out hard, then you must gently twist them back and forth;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair and raise her feet;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	and then at the top of the seat on the ground, and paint on the woman, so that she does not fall while standing;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies if he holds his hands on the knife that is placed in front, and pulls out the child, and leaves it even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from delivery of the child between his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes on its feet, so let him come up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Until it jumps just as high as the knuckles, so she is ordered to bend down, and makes her shake with fear;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If you jump, then God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump as we have said, then turn him little by little so that he is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is light-headed.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come as we have said, then take muscle from the back, and oil of sisle, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and sit on the nature of the woman inside and away this ointment, then let her sit in water until she is soaked the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is wet soaked, then let him do a chain of myrrh, and put it off, and let it lie for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then let her sit on a seat, then make her sneeze and straiten her mouth and nose, and pinch her belly lightly, for the fetuses jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the delivery of the child between her legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	and when the fetus comes in this form, if I put the belly his hands poking and poking;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let it be ligated on its neck, and let the feet hang down, and let it lie on its back;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold his hands poking and poking, then pinch the belly lightly, so that she is emptied down;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he falls, so don't take your feet and move your body, then move your stomach up, then pour your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and the child pokes and pokes;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and order the woman to stretch herself as long as the child is.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the delivery of the child who comes with a wide hand hanging down one side at a time
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it comes to bring back the hand;
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if you can't bring it back, so the woman stands up and goes;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she can't go, so make her sit up on a bed, and put her feet together;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then arrange the muscles as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she doesn't give birth, so make her sit on a chair, and then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and the child according to the natural form, and makes it shake, and orders her to stretch herself as long as the child is.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	The child's delivery from his mother's womb, and he spread his hands wide, and turned his face toward her back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is fitting that the surgeon clean his hands, then wash them little by little, and dry them lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	And when he is clean, if he puts on the muslin bandage of cotton and oil as we have said, then he commands that she moves little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	And when you have done this, if the fire is placed in a position, and he commands that it be heated;
et la fai esternuer.	and then he makes it shake.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the second time
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When he comes in this way for all the second time, if you cut off his fingernail, as long as the moisture is empty;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he hangs himself by the neck, so that it cuts off his breath, so that he does not hold back, and the hangman dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then pour the child in, as long as you have put it in the right way, and command the woman that she does not shake herself at all:
adonques si istra legierement.	So then if lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	For it is known that many are born, and only three or four at a time.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not an extraordinary thing, and seldom happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are an extraordinary thing, and rarely live, if one does not know.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, which are multiplied, and are desired by the doctor who devises them, who is tied to the bodge;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and they are not born naturally as all of us do, if we have said it.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they are born lightly, as we have said, and the subtle doctor, and quickly and lightly does what he does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and make it so that it is worth doing for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	And they are not formed in the womb of one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more than fifteen until they are shaped like a child by the measure of the wise glory, and the doctor knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Make it according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or an aborted child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is appropriate that you know whether the woman is of sound health, and she has no accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is appropriate that the woman be seated on her heels, with her knees bent toward her chest and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the assistant applies the poultice to both parts, so that she is laid on a bed as if she were about to give birth to a child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with wet oil made from amaranth and fenugrec and linseed seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these musk ambrosia;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	Then place the bottle lightly in the sea, and then take care that he who drinks does not drink too much wine that is suitable for him, and be careful that the one who drinks does not get dressed up so that he comes to his head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	if he puts the wine in his hair or in his throat or in his mouth or in his palate or cuts it with a razor or near the sides, and if he drinks, he will be drunk on his feet, he will fall down or he will cut himself at the edges;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is convenient that he hold the bottle in his right hand, and place the cup between his two hands with his left hand, and pour the wine lightly in all of these places until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	this is the form of the wine;
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then put another bottle together, so that the extraction is even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stand it equally by moving it from one side to the other, so that it can be set, and hold the lower teeth together with a bit of force, like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	If one part stops moving, if you rub some oil on its two sides and press it in that part, and then pull the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if one part doesn't move at all, place this tooth higher up or lower down, and do so until it has set completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot return due to a spasm, you must wrap it in a sheet so that it sets completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	Then cut into the joint of the foot or at the neck, and in the other hand also, and between the toes.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the child's hip is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is an acute angle, you must push the thorny spatula between your two hips, and push the angle and extract the spike.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you hold the instrument which is called "almond", from which the form comes with the instruments or chalk that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so I make it fix itself by nature;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then draw out the bones with pliers, and the head of the shoulder is torn out with force if it does not come off easily, until the moisture that is there comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then break it into pieces with a hammer so you can remove it;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, so that it is necessary to pierce you until the moisture runs;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he falls on his feet, if it is a light atraction, and if we bring him to the mouth of the mare, it is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is dislocated in the belly or in the hip, so that you must take off the bandages wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and break the belly or hip, until the moisture that is there runs;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if his other member is osteitic, and the head remains, then he pulls his hand away completely from the marrow, and draws it up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then I pour some wine or two, and draw it out strongly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by heat that has come to it, so that it cannot work any more, then one must provide moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and he provides with plasters, and cuts in acidic, moistening, and softening things.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the wound is on his ribcage, and you can make it even, then provide what we have said for a live child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one does not have the power, then he draws it out in pieces, and leaves nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, provide what we have said for warm, new marrow that comes from the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flow occurs, then if it is put in water it is restrained, and other treatments are given.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb a child had been killed, then consult another on that one, and it was killed again.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the wound began to swell and then it broke open and there was a great pus.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I couldn't close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there put an arm, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for this man's belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I want to bandage the wound, and hold them together as long as the woman was in a better state;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and wait for the woman to be longer than ten years, and it was fixed a little bow from its place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have remembered this medicine only that when the master tries an strange thing, he may know how to put help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the married woman back to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	Here comes the form of the pressure, where we pull the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns are two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns are more subtle than the restraint, and it is made of oak or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the horn must be very wide, and the margins of the trees must be, and a length of about one palm and a half;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the two limbs be twice the length of this half palm, or a little longer.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two joints are inserted into the mouth of the socket to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made of oak or boxwood, according to the shape of the claws;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have two joints, as you see, a palm long and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the socket opened for all the instrument, so that the woman sits on the bed, her legs hanging down and her feet spread out, then set the two joints together in the socket, and hold the top of the instrument between her knees;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand for all the instrument, just as you did for the claws evenly, according to the quantity that you see the mouth of the socket opened, until the ball makes what she wants;
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	All these instruments are completely assembled, and they are multiplied by their appearances.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when you have prepared the instruments, then the operation is faster, and higher up for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair about the instrument unless you have prepared it, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second is retained for childbirth, it is necessary that you command the disease to keep its hair, and then she makes her stand and shake from condition, and her hands are drawn back to the mouth and neck;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if it does not hold, well is it.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, if I can take it, and make a hole or cover, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the sick, as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or none of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	and then place a tube or hole at the tip of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the wound, and suck out the vapors that come into the wound;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you do not let him get well soon.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	If she remains well after this treatment and is not better, order her to soak her left hand in oil of saffron or in a muscadine mixture of alto, and then pour it out again, and do it a second time;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, if she pricks it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the wound does not break at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but make her move it lightly from side to side, and then draw it out;
si venra et se desaerdra.	then it will come out and fall away.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is tight and constricted, we have said the treatment of sneezing, and of vaporizing herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all those we have said, so guard that you do not follow the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that he who is in the mouth of the mare, you tie him to the cunt of the woman, then you cauterize with ointment tetrafarmer.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if she gets worse and comes again, it will be fierce;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but first, when the wound is infected with a bad smell in the stomach and head of the patient, and blisters on the disease.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	So it is necessary to smoke in an appropriate way:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	neither of the old have experienced smoking with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument by which one smokes the woman to retain the flowers and the second is such:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	and it is as if to a dog, and put the head gently in the smoke, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the smoke be on the coals, and burn it until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce through the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but they are cut off by a subtle surgeon.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary that he who cuts with the surgeon pierce his foundation at his own will, and does not cut with a small chisel and seal the seam so that he does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dip in another moisture with wine and oil, then treat with ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, then place or pierce a hole with an awl, and let the hand remain extended, and be careful when he goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And never comes a sudden cauterization of a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	If it is necessary to cover the sudden cauterization:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if sooth, if as we have said of the wine of plunging.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas which come from the foundation are an expansion, and more difficult to come than from the foundation of the members, or in the space between the two parts, if it is one or more fistulas;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when this foundation is old, if you open it, and a little dampness comes out white or subtle bow, and these fistulas are never persisting;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and are caused by what is in this area of excretion or ventosity when the patient does excretion, and perhaps in leap some towards.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if fistulas that pierce just up to the bladder, and just up to the half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and arrive just up to the junction of the thigh, and just up to the notch of the neck.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so one knows that the persistent fistula is at the foundation, and does not persist:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and is that you pierce your second finger or foundation, and pierce a small needle of silver or iron in the fistula when there is no twists:
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if there is twists, if you pierce with a small string of rope or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the string or hair in your finger:
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and does not come from perforation of vomiting or wind, nor see as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	that it does not pierce at all.
si te haste dou curer.	if you hurry to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the conduit of urine, if it causes urine to flow, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced only up to the join of the crotch, if is the tent that comes up to the place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no twist and the invention of the pain inside, if it is that he comes soon, and does not come medicine nor suddenly by rubbing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persisting abscesses there is no cure except work, and vanity of foolish dreams that enter into them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not persistent and not old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and let his legs hang down to his knees, and let his knees bend towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	Then pour water into a tub, or mud if there is a twist, until you know where the tub comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain in his back, then pour water on your two fingers, and it will feel like the tub has pierced him;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and is uncovered where you feel between your thumb and the finger next to it, then know that it is a persistent wound;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not hurt, then it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should try all means to cure some, but most of them do not work;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that can be given, if one heats the fine cauldron according to the width of the fistula, as it is said above;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and put all the heat into the tube, until it comes out smoothly from the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and make it twice or three times, as long as you know that these charred things are like an owl's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of wet tenders bathes it, until that char comes out, and then the doctor of ointment makes a char and binds it up.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is done thus, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, otherwise it cannot be healed;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it is tried between, and does not pierce until the top which is at the base, and on either side of the tube there is a thick covering of char or of medicine, and you see the tube at the place where the covering begins to move;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the cover of the tube of the fistula is cut off and reset before the tube, and then the fire is applied after it, until it comes to the top of the tube;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and will be delivered the test, and shall be strong;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then my god shall deliver those charred trees that seem like a feather of an owl, and none remain thereat.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you have a fever, and heat comes between you and the work, then fire cautery or an acrid medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery brings together two things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, on the one hand, the burning of these charred shoulders, and on the other, the evacuation of blood and drying up of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the healer of wet tents will dry or roast it, until its leathery layer is peeled off, and those charred shoulders are roasted in the fire;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then heal the wound of the rusting hard shoulders, and these dry remedies are applied.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is reset, if it is well and does not return to its place.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes from the foundation itself, and is separated from the body, then it should be cut off or severed from the foundation, and this should be done.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent, and there is within it the fabric or the shoulder or the thing that is about to pierce, if there is no way of comfort or hope except by the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you burn it as we have said, or you chop it just to the root, or if you cannot, try and treat it first as mentioned above.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not cut it too short, so that you do not chop the root of the hair, and come to the ends voluntarily;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	if it is healthy again, or you remove the covering and clean it thoroughly after chopping off the root, or with a tent or some other tool;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then put on a new skin, as we have said;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the opposite part of the root:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	which is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And never use this method for a fistula:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is or it costs from the base of the delicate skin on top, so take a tent with a hole at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour out water in two, and pour the tent into all the thread in the fistula as long as it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is leaking from the edge of the base inside, then remove the thread from that hole, so that you put your finger on the base;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and train the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and hold them apart, and leave it for one day;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain it at all, until the thread covers these joints that are between two, and they rub;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound as long as it is soldered and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all ways that you can, if it is not too perfectly enclosed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make the lacing shut too perfectly, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spike with thorns that one makes the fistula should be sharp, part and cut;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand no, so that you do not cover what you must not cover, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	There are two ways of causing gangrene.
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	there are two ways of causing gangrene: either because they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and if there is one or more, they are far from the foundation and at the top of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are far away if they have a little moisture, and then again or a little bit of clear water or a little bit of blood, and their color is like that of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them deep in the foundation is that you order the patient to sweat by sweating him in chambers until the foundations are far away, and the fils come out;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and hold it as with pliers, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at the roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if they cannot hold them back due to their moisture, take them from the sheet, or from the cotton, or from a piece of cloth.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them towards you, then wrap them up and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire's place;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or fire cautery as it is said in the chapter of cauterizing, so that you cure them with other cures until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if its foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a hot, sharp instrument to wash away what is in the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Can the patient be stretched out, and if his threads are firmly attached to the foundation, then the cure is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and hold them with your finger or pliers and wrap them up, then cure them as we have said until they are healed, and avoid cutting with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	If it is necessary for you to add a suture in this way:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	Take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then wind the thread around the needle and make the needle go through from the other side, and return the two ends of the thread onto the needle, and if it is wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and tie the thread into a knot, then remove the needle, and do the same for all of them, and leave one there so that the blood may run out;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put a damp cloth on the foundation with oil or balm, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, if it is cured with ointment and other cures, until it is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Sometimes there is drying out at the end of the intestine, and by constriction of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is not effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If it is necessary for you to rub the scab off with a spatula or your nail from above, which does not allow it to get wet;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and then treat him as long as he is still alive as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if he cannot be sutured, then start shaving again more forcefully than before, until the wound heals and is scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat him as long as he is still alive.
dou fremit	The patient should let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Formica is a small appearance in front of the hole, and goes away completely.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and at no time does it hurt, and you feel it like death rumbles, and it comes all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the doctor must take a feather from an owl's wing, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that feather on the rumble until the purple circle covers the whole area.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around all of the feather as you cover the entire area with it, and then fix it completely, and scorch the rumble from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make this of a dog's or a horse's or a pig's tooth according to this form, and be subtle and draw over it.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	Ne may percii, por muez tenee a doii, et muez preessee.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you feel pain, if the cauterization burns, as it is before or after the application of the cautery paste.
de la forme dou clistere	in the form of a clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	No matter if done with silver enema or oak bark, or with melted lead or moldy wine;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	And no matter if these small or large instruments are used, according to the condition they are applied to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These therefore that one introduces in the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clister is little and big if it is above wide, or if the belly is tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and I have observed a distension or an swelling, as you see, and a pain in the abdomen that pierces;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there is a protrusion on one side of the abdomen, and on the other there is a depression;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and either the abdomen is drained with a bladder of beast or parchment, and piercing all around the little protrusions, and between each there is a space of thread, then tightly wrap the abdomen with a strong knot of thread crossed around it, and so gather the abdomen together as if it were a sheep;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, if the thread of the instrument in front of it is strong, then cauterize.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	This is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	and let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the cauterizer with oil or olive oil or similar thing, then pour it lightly:
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister holds it with both hands until it is completely dry, then removes the cauterizer, and places the patient's legs against the wall, and lets the medicine come out, if necessary:
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps a whole night, then it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you bandage him with a plaster because of the decay of his belly, and the medicine comes out quickly, then wait until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the fundament or abscess, then let the cauterizer be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	This is the shape of a thin cauterizer above where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have said above in the division the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will tell you the cures for hands and medicine, according to compleness.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds they are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that cause wounds are by hitting with a stone, or cutting with an épée or a couteau, or a lance or a fust or a saiette, or similar objects;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made according to the laws of the corps, such as a wound that strikes the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, if it is by hitting with a stone or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is great, and you doubt much about the apotheosis:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	If he comes soon enough to the head, if there is no blood from the wound, and if it is applied in the opposite direction of the wounded part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from wine and fattening meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	If he does not heal soon, if his flesh is wasting away, and if he does not drink wine or eat cheese;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, if an abscess forms, wet it with oil and apply a hot poultice or wine that stifles;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no heat on the wound, if it is fresh and not moved by the wind, dust; I will say a little later:
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if fire has moved it, if he puts on some onions, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as of a sword-slayer and like it, and the lips cannot be brought together by tenderness, if they are brought together by sewing, as I say to the wounds of the belly, by the seam.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is open to the bone and dry, and holds only a little blood, then
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And then heal the wound with medicine, and restore it with hard skin in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as roasted testicles and bread, and also poultry and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find leather rot, and it doesn't reach the bone, then cut off the rot completely, and burn it, then heal it;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, from which blood cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then let it return to its place like a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if that doesn't help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light healing is:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	Here is that you put in this powder which hardens so that fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the way of the powder is thus:
pren encens une partie;	Take incense a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	chald the live three parts, and the powder slightly, and employ the wound, and holds it firmly, until it is well healed and joined to all its dragon's blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then bind it well, and leave it undisturbed, if it swells;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for the medicine should not be removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we use this clay alone, except that incense or dragon' s blood is not moved, but that fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, even slightly, put at least half of this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some olive oil or grain flour made from water and honey, until it is well cooked;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then he should cure with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it gently with tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you here the breaks of the skull.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	For if the wound is in the throat, and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but it hurts at the throat where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is a baby, if there is no other device than to let the cure take place and not put anything restricting, because it hurts the baby and makes it retract;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the baby is cold and its circulation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but be the medicine soft, as hot water in lukewarm water, and mixed with oil of roses, and wash it too with lukewarm water, and other stones of minimal value according to this way, and moistened with oils.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that the scar is long, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and he is shaved and full of hair, then pierce or cut lower down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery has been cut and bleeding occurs, then stop the flow of blood, and cauterize it as well;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the throat is cut, or the voice, and the course is maintained, so that the meat goes down, if the voice is cut on the neck of the throat, and does not touch the throat but is put back in its natural form;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it in place and let it rest for a few days, and then treat with onions until he is well;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, let it be probed;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are pieces of bone, if they can be taken out whole, and those that cannot be taken out whole, leave it until the wound festers and drains, and let the discharge come out and the wound be cleaned;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has developed an abscess, then treat it as I have said in my chapter on abscesses.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a lance or dagger cut, and the wound is deep, look at the wound from all sides and massage the patient's flesh:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If the wound is mortal, then
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	If the wound is not profound and is fresh with blood, then put the powder to it immediately so that it does not hold back the blood, and let it rest in the body, and close the wound.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	However, I do not advise applying a poultice today and tomorrow, but rather leave it uncovered.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	If you do not have an ointment, then put a wet cloth on the wound to absorb the moisture and let the patient lie down on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	If there is no spasm, nor a painful trembling of the body or extraction of an alien object;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	Then, when you see that the bones are in place, know that the wound has been saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal this wound with the medicine of tent and other medicines, until it is well;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, then know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	if the cure is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is caused by a blade or knife and is straightforward, or in the back, or at the top, then know the cure of that which is before.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, from sewing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, from powder, and if it has broken into the bone, and has come loose in pieces, then know the wound, and the dangerous parts if they are separated;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not separated, then leave the wound to fester, and then extract with care;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds and other limbs, this is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement dou ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The breaking open of the belly is great and wide and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the great wound, let there come none of the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, so that the entrance of the bile does not happen.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the stitch is more painful, and there comes no small wound than the great one, so that it is not better to put the intestines back in, if they are not put back in from warm to warm;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell so that they feel cold, if they are put back in, and because it is better to leave the small wound alone, because if you leave the intestine at its place than at the others II.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to IV manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the common stitches have in the stitch of the belly, and the stitch of the other wounds of the body and two other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and nevertheless they are more proper with the stitch of the belly, and I will say each one and will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and there is no matter of the intestines outside, and there is nothing to put back in it, this is done by one of two ways.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen with fever.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in the third way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	moisten a sponge or I mool dried cloth in cold water only, or you cook in hot water and cumin and spice, and rinse the intestines until they swell;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and never do this while restringing, and be wet that you are cool by dislodging it.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestines with cold or hot water and cook them, because this keeps the entrance closed to little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if he cannot enter, then make a little cut in the wound with the instrument with which we cut the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first cure is to put it to bed so that we do not have to chop it off unless there is great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	this is the instrument with which one divides it;
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut into the core and then pull it out and form it like this:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines protrude, if you return them to their natural place in their proper position, if you can do so, for that is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide and in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and put their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if the wound is in the lower part of the abdomen, then put the head and breast higher than the lower parts, and so the opening of the abdomen is in one of the two parts, so that you align it with the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so it is necessary to treat what I have said here, in great wounds and small ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds, however, if you are unarmed, then place your hands over the wound and bind it with a cloth that covers the whole tear to your hand, and join the lips together;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and that is the common way of stitching, and it is that you should squeeze a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave some space from the top of the wound, and put in a needle with very strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the leather with the two ends of the thong, which is inside the leather, until you make it piercing from that side, and join the two ends of the thong together, all four together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then remove a double thread from the needle from two sides, then join the two ends of the wound together, and then leave some space, and put in another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	and then lay it on thread as you did the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what you need with needles until all the wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be fine and coarse, because the fine needles go through all the cloth, and the very coarse ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for it is necessary that they are small;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and do not put the needles too far away from the edge of the cloth and hide, so that they go through and open the wound before it is healed;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut off the heads of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and put a blanket or sheet over the heads of the needles to hold them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this way of sewing with needles is more convenient for small wounds, because it requires only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitch is common, and it is that you join the two pieces of leather with the two pieces of thread together on an awl or there is one strong line of thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these three together, I will take the awl to the part where you began, in the way that we sew clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch the thickness of a small nail;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	This stitch is good for a man, and I will sew up an injury that he had or his belly, which was torn by a knife, and the wound was more than two palms in length, and there were intestines about two palms in length, and the wound went into his belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him back his intestine when he had been out for 22 hours, and the wound was sewn up after 15 days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the miraculously happened that he died, and this is a wonder;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where there was no ointment, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and dip it twice a day in the wound, and wash it with honey water until it was well.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	I will now tell you the two proper ways to stitch:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and pass it through the flesh from outside in;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	When it has pierced the flesh from right to left, so that the thread or stitch goes through the flesh, and you have threaded the needle, and pierce it from the other side from inside out;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and know about this stitch that you also sew as the pelters do fur, and let the fur be on one side, and take it up on the other, until the stitch is finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second way to stitch, which Galen properly describes, so that as if no one were sewing it, putting together the two parts naturally, and applying one of the heads where the stitch goes to the other head in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	Place a pin or spike near the mirror above, and pierce that single point alone, and leave the two shoulders in peace.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	Then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part only up to the middle point of the two shoulders.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	Then pierce one and then the other from the outside part only up to the middle point of the two shoulders, in the two other shoulders that are on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	And this is the method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galien thus says in response to that statement, and no one contradicts him: when sewing the belly on two needles, each with its own thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	And one needle must be pushed from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew with needles for corroding.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the breach is in the middle of the belly, then the stitch is greater than those on either side of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgments for the wound are such as they are for other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the arrow has moved it, if you put back the intestine and the stitch;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and then put on the powder that rubs in, and if the arrow has moved it, put on any ointment that is present, until the wound dries up;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cook the thread, and let the sutures be tight, and the wax;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the wound as with others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicine, put on, soon enough that it begins to dry up, cotton wool, and stir it twice a day until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no other need for medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound does not make a union with the principal members, then it is appropriate to moisten another light in oil of thyme or oil of roses, and place it around the joints, and cut off the tendons;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if it hurts or puts on a rash in the bulges, and many times comes, if the blisters of black wine are washed off, and most often the putrefaction comes up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierces it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to be healed than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is still attached to the womb, and this is because of the formation of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and its nearness to children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar jumps out of the wound, it is reset backwards as well as the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and becomes blue or black, it is appropriate to lay the site that is black, so that blood does not come, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and wrap what is between the bandage, and place the two shoulders hanging from the edge of the wound to the end so that the extraction when the bones chitter, and the wound oozes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, then can one restore it in some men, for I have seen that some were pierced by a bow or an arrow from a lance's belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it oozed and became a fistula, and there was vomiting and wind;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated him according to what I could do, and did not cease to subdue it until he was healed, and his bones were mended.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw the man mended, I doubted that the disease had not done him harm in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no evil, but delay in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and say no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take three fingers from a big testicle, then join the lips of the wound, and when the fingers have opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that she draws her mouth out;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then he covers the head, and this remains in place so that it cannot be separated, then he puts another finger after in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	This chief if it burns in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal in some way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this thread of intestine that has been carefully cut off, and then tie the end of this thread to the end of a thin twisted linen thread, then tie the thread to the needle, and in cutting the intestine, and take it back out of the incision;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing frissons is good only according to the way of faith and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, most importantly when it is in one of the internal groins, there is no cure except by carefulness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from fistula or which it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that all wound or abscess, when it heals, is called "fistula" in general, and most so when it is scarred and turns into a bowl.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the true notion wrong and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also like the feathers of an owl;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never clearly in a clear bow, and sometimes thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and never pokes, and sometimes is enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	I have already spoken in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed and there is no cure, it is good only by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the little of the blood or the color;
ou por sa malice;	for his evil.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	with a sharp edge within, and on the lips, so that it does not grow there;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or where there is too much bowels;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	whose skin is rotten, and the substance is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or whose medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or where the corruption is like that of a pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or whose property in the region is late digestion and late health, and goes away by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already explained all these causes and signs, and the remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or covient that I do make you know the cure of fistula which is made by oevre of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	I know that a fistula can occur in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the sinews, or to the spine of the back, or to any of the joints of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if so that comes to the principle member's property, and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are of great sickness, and there is only toil, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is no fistula that does not come to the level I have said, and you have promised to heal it, and you see it clearly, so take a tent of rain or iron, if the fistula is straight, so ask it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is twisted, then seek it with a thin tent of vinegar, for the vinegar bends slightly within the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula is very broken and you cannot properly seek it with tents, then let it be cleansed with vinegar through one of the breaks, for it moistens so much from one break to another, and purifies;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and then examine the swelling at your hand, that you know if there are any bones or nerves, and it is completely shaved off, and ask the patient very well about the pain that he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, whether it is good or bad, cut off the false joint and the corrupt joints that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then cure it as long as it is healthy, and the fistula is very deep from the right place, so that you cut it perfectly well as much as you can, then you put wet medicine on it until the chief of the fistula, so that the medicine corrupts the excess that has been kept at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I meet ointments healing the disease, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	If it is not healed with this, then let him be cauterized as we have said, and if his bone is corrupted by the abscess, let him take care.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve is injured in the main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if his bone is exposed and there is corruption and darkness, let him treat it with healing ointments as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and its bone returns to its place as before, know that you have not gone far enough in the treatment:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	if it is exposed and kept until you are at the bottom, and all the bone corruption is removed, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is healed in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that corruption is too perfect, so you cannot come.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to let nature take its course;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is one small bone corrupted, and you can pull it out with tweezers, if there are many bones, pull them out one by one, leaving none behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture causes opposition and it is hot and humid, and copious moisture and sweat, deliver the bones;
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put on the wound something that promotes corruption, and leave it there for a while until the bone is腐敗したのです。
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	then if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, put on the wound a black substance until all the bone has腐敗したのです。
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the wound腐rot, and comes up to just short of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is properly sewn and covered all the way to the corruption, and then treated as long as it remains solid;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you about a hunchback who happened to him in his leg, so that you take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	He was a young man of about 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg from an inner cause, so that the matter came out to the leg, and there was a large abscess, and he had no reason for opening it.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	But the mirror, due to his madness, opened it so much that it corroded a lot of matter, and became a fistula, and came to be very dangerous, so that everyone was afraid, and there was moisture and moisture in the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many times I have cured them in two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were used to cure him, and those that run through the large passages with great pain;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and became red in the youth's body, and had an orange color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I fixed a tent in one of those holes, and then searched all the holes, and I found that one came out against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	So I hurried then, and копал in one of the passages as far as I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotted and broken, and the corruption came to the bone itself;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew what had been taken from the bone, and I took care that there should be no other corruption than that which I had taken out;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicines that are used by long time, and could not hold it together;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before, and found continued corruption in the bone, and burned it, and then put the bone back together, and bent over to weld the joint;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not so much as cup my hand around one end of the bone, and I took it away from all its ends, then I restored it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he was healed and firmly welded together, and it would no longer be necessary to open the wound for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car for the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was healed entirely, and gave birth in place of the bone a hard child, and was of good temper and did not have any harm or opposite from all in all, nor air nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the skeleton, then it should be treated in this way:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take a stick, and extend it at the top of the bone which is separated, and
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another thinner line of thread on the other side of the bone, and tie it above the separated part, and let the thread extend to the end of the bone, and then take off the thread from the top of the bone, and uncover the thread where you see that it should be tied, so that the thread does not fray the bone;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a stone or a wedge of wood under it to move the chest;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and wait until one can see and feel the corruption, and another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole chest;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put a wedge under it, and then unpick the corruption from one part to another, and pick the wound long where the corruption is; as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the joint with corruption, and unpick the bone where it is;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other angle but to cover it;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is at the base of the hand, or at the base of the foot, then this is a very bad thing, but you must first inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean in all ways that you can, but that the vein or nerve does not make you contrary;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisor and the saws for covering these bones are many, according to the siteness of the bones and the appearance of the teeth, and their largeness and their finenesse, and their height and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this it is necessary that he prepare his instrument to each appearance of work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manner of the diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if he thinks the instrument in which you are skilled is suitable for him.
dou feu	fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may be dislocated by a fall or by being pushed out of place;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have medicated this corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not profit, if you cover that member to the place where the corruption comes, so that the patient escapes from death by the corruption of the member itself, or by the malice, which is greater, of the loss of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limbs become black, if it seems that they have been burned by fire, and after that darkness, for corruption of the member from member takes place, and embraces all the body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if it is due to copper, and if it is caused by the stinging of certain poisonous animals, such as sea scorpions or weasels, then the corruption is at the top of the two bones, if it cracks, and give it no space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes only up to the hand, if the crack is at the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	And if it comes up to the arm, if the crack is in the shoulder;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the shoulder, then it is death, and there is no remedy except to take all of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and until the rust comes where the stone:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes in the first joint, then the cap after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes where the stone, then the cap all the way down;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises up the leg, then the cap at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other danger to the patient but death;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the way to cap or sew the member is that you tie it above and below, and extend two ministers one of the lines down, and two others the other line up, and you remove the splint that is between the two lines at a wide space, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then cap or sew it, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place, and brings another wound and abscess to the patient;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the pain comes when you work, then cauterize the area thoroughly, or put some powders that restrain it on.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then return to your medicine as long as it is complete, then tie the injured member with a convenient bandage, and cure it until it is healed;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	And I will tell you what happened to him at home in some detail:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	He had a blackness that seemed like fire, and this corruption came first to his foot, staining the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the noble saw the corruption, he took off the shoe, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	And long after that the corruption returned to his hand, and came to me, and I put on him things that irritated the skin after purifying the body, and could not stop the corruption;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	And he said to me, "I will have you cut off his hand," and I refused, for I hoped to recover the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubt that if he cuts his hand, he will not die, for the virtue of man is weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he became despairing and returned to his country, and he cauterized his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I know of no other way than this that if one has to do it, one should do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and delays so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they rot and pierce, and the bowel falls out, and stays in the belly, also as our serfs;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is also as fine as silk, and does not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "saint" and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it reaches down to the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and cook it so that you wrap all of the meat, and most importantly when it is thin, as well as fabric.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not heat it for its corrosion.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	If you have cooked the meat and it is still partially raw, and the meat is thin like a blanket, then you should cook it in a bath.
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look at whether the breasts are large, and the sweat that comes from them is of a foul odor, then you should clistere with Egyptian medicine which is made like this:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take oil and lead and equal parts, and put them to boil on the fire, until the medicine becomes red, and is also as thick as honey:
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take from this according to your need, and make it with water and honey, and with the ash of the lark, and extract the pus.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine in for 2 hours, then remove it by squeezing it out;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	make this ointment 10 times, until the sinews are all broken up and the pus is gone;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and never make this ointment with water and ashes, when this medicine is not present, but rather squeeze ash from the vine wood, and pour water on top, then let it flow and make an ointment, until you know that the sinews are well broken up;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither this Egyptian medicine nor water and ashes, then make an ointment with a little bit of lead;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you make it with honey and wine, that honey has the property to break up and wash away, and the wine makes the sinew bitter;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done so, and you have engaged that the breasts are well changed, if the ointment of this one who makes the milk come out in it, and it is that you squeeze poultices definitively, and the paint with oil of roses and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you plaster it with some medicines and ointments, of which I have spoken in treating of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the nipple is small, and the plaster of the clister does not enter, if you widen it slightly with an iron hook, and put a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilican ointment on it, as wide as it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, so that the cut allows the plaster to enter, and the nipple that falls is higher up or lower down than it should be;
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is complete, if it does not leave a gap.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cover the bowstring as you see, so arrange it in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest possible level; for when the bow is complete, if it does not leave a gap, and if you cannot cover the bowstring as you see, so arrange it in such a way:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bow runs lightly downstream, and does not leave anything of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidating medicines to put over the wound, and are on a linen cloth that covers all the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cover as tightly as possible the hole on the side where the arrow went out, since it is sutured again according to the quantity of the hole, and put it over the wound to support the bow, and do not take off the large cloth for several days;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and those who are on the breast of the chest, often for to extract the bowel, and what runs from the bowels, if it is poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and how much the medicine has spread out and you see the nature that rises on the chest of the breast, then know that the breasts have already started to move, and bring the healing;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning or the third day, and when you open the wound, if you change another cloth, and renew the dressing;
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become sore and swollen after many days, know that her breasts do not ache.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons run long after a while, but you don't despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people whose wounds get worse with wet clothes, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and the undigested bowels rise up from the chest after many days, knowing that the breasts are not moving;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if it is late to hear, and is prolonged, so prepare medicines mixing moist in substance and drying in virtue, as the attention finally, for there is a great part of vitriol, and this is the behind medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take attention finally, and make it with oil rosin, and aromatize it with equal wine in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then the configure and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and that the best made honey cooked thickened, when attention finally is not present, or you take mirr and aloes and incense, and grind it, and powder on the honey when it is out of fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then spread on a cloth, and put it on the chest, and never administer to him an aromatizer long, and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundredth;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and in the use of simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make a powder, and put on honey which I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is long and this cure does not work, then you will know that corruption has set in fully, and causes impression in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in members;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the cure of the cure of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toe of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Pancreatic is an abscess that may emerge from the nail of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps may emerge in another two;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it has broken open, and no attention is given, then it may come to the formation of an abscess, and corruption and pus fill up so much at the root of the nail that perhaps it may fill them all up;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corrosion just to the bone, as much as there is stinking pain, and the shoulder of the two wide bones, and the color flows.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not take, then you must take away all the surplus that has been stored up under the finger nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The caustic is a great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses the wound and pricks it, and bleeds it, then you should put a hot and corrosive remedy on it to cut off all of it;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then he cures with onions as long as it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and trim it, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the two corrupted, then cut them off as much as it is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and gurgling, and smells of great pain, then you must first heal it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail down from above with a chisel at an angle, and be careful that the cutting does not reach the bed of the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	la douleur du cœur de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Les deux membres qui naissent dans les mains de certains hommes sont parfois charnus, et parfois osseux, et n'ont jamais d'ongles, et aucune racine de la jointure ne nait en aucun d'eux.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	Whoever is born in the middle of the neck does not move, and whoever is born at the hinge joint may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	The size of that which is chubby should be small:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it in its root with a large chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	Whoever is born at the hinge joint should be treated with great care:
si te tien dou coper.	If you keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those who are born in the heart of the joint, if it is right that you cut the rounded part up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, and then treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come together by nature at birth, or by the assembly of a wound, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you believe that you can cover the one that is withering, so that it repairs itself according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two blankets or sheets wet with oil so that they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or put between two thin rags so that the threads do not stick together, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Se soudemens comes to any of its two with the palm, so hold it firm as it should be.
des vils	of
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The veins are grossly wrapped with excessive melancholy matter, which comes from many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more comes in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, so that others
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore you must not at any time administer a laxative to him, but cure him from the base.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The cure with iron is done according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they are boiled, and the black blood is drained;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is that you open the vein and drain it all.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The size should be determined according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first make the leg hot with strong water until the thick blood is thinned, then draw the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the ankle;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	and cut the vein in I place, or II or III, of large size, then slice and draw strongly out black blood to your hand, from one top to another, as much as much of blood the virtue of disease can bear;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bandage it, and command that he turns his meat with black pepper;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and start again the evacuation and the bloodletting when veins are clear, and press on the disease.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The healing is done according to this method:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Reheals the leg of the disease: if there is hair, then he puts it in water, and bathes it with hot water until it turns red, and opens veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you don't have a bath, heat it over fire, and then cut the vein at the top of the shin, or in the part below the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	and soak the skin with vinegar, and scald each side until it feels hot;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it is red and black, and when it enters or leather so seems as a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then pour the wine into it until it is warmed by the leather, and then dip it lightly in vinegar, and then cover it with a cloth for three days;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scald the skin on the vein until it feels hot, then dip it lightly in vinegar, as you have done, and then cover it with another knife, as you have done first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another size, or more if you need it, then dip it and then cut at the second level, and then treat and dip again;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract from one size to another until it has completely dried up, then cut off;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you can't pull and lift it out, then put a needle on one of the threads, and tie it up and pull it out, and cut off the thread, and turn your hand back and forth until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from slipping, because if it slips, then you can't pull or lift it out, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have finished treating it, put wet wool soaked in wine and oil on top of the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until he gets better.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped up together, and it isn't straightened out, as we have said, then you must cut it open, but don't cover it up;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and pull it apart as we have described before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron where the thread slips should be curved, and don' t cut it off, so that it doesn' t slip into the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is a large loop, because if it were thin, it would wrap around the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein runs through the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and on the ground where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	And perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this causes the skin to peel off from within, as if it were crawling and winding between the leather and the skin.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that there is a very great swelling in the leg, then the shape of it changes, and the wound begins to come out, just as the root of a plant does.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head is open, if you wrap a piece of cloth around the head from one and a half feet to two feet long, and then cover it with the cloth, and leave the cloth hanging down the leg, and whenever there is no more cloth on the leg, if the cloth is wrapped around the head again, and covered.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, take a part of it, and wrap up the rest, and do not cover it at all in its root as long as it is all out;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you take it, so it enters the chest, and brings an abscess and corruption to it or there, and causes a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for this thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the chest, and nothing remains of it or there;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and this vein does not come out when it is treated with the palm of the hand or ten fingers, and a great many come to me, to which she was of ten fingers long, and when you take it, if it bottles or breaks, and pierces up to the fundament, so that all comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and the material that is inside be empty, and bring to its place medicines against corruption every day, then heal it as you would treat an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And in no way shall hands be held to this vein, and least of all when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, for it is a great risk, and from which rain comes.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Cure therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which are born between leather and horse
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our language "buff disease", because it often occurs in buffaloes, and is a small worm that arises between skin and carriage, and goes up and down all over the body, causing burning as it moves from one member to another, until it comes out of the skin, and then it jumps away;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	And is infected with pus caused by certain humors, so that they come towards, spiral, and shine, and are like worms or maggots in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	And there is doubt of its maliciousness, for when it goes through the body, and comes to the head, and enters the oil, by chance it returns, and destroys the oil;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it治it and extractit, then can't one do but once:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	So then it is necessary that you place the head up and fixit with a strong knot tightly, then push down and treatit firmly, and let it move freely in the socket, and if you don't findit, then cauterizeit with fire while it's moving:
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, is if it tears the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the oil, then extractit it carefully, then push down and treatit firmly:
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and use the medicine of washing with soluble medicines to remove bad humors from rot, and wash himself with meat that is rotting:
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and moves from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and I poked after, and I saw it rise as quickly as a worm does, as if it were silver, when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place, and it entered into her shoulder, and then a poking after came all through the body, until it came to her other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	and then she told me that she was twisting all through her body again, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how she moved from member to member, because I had never seen this disease move in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Anyway, many had wanted to move their pain from one place to another, but I did not want to do so, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that this was why the woman's body was so cold, and her veins uncovered, and because her breath appeared to be constricted;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and do not agree with this treatment for those who are very hungry, and have moist bodies and closed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you treat this disease and the patient feels that pain, if it does not open as we have said, put a bandage on it and bind it tightly, and then cut it off as much as it hurts;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the wound;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see your hair, take care of those who cause the wind to blow out, as if they were foul pills, and pills of serapin, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of their entry into the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is that there are those who have long points, short points, hair, and welded;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those who have two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that moves in any member in two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	If a member is principal, as the skull, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she falls off in any of these parts, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, you
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	it is appropriate for you to wash out this arrow, because death comes after many preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when the bad sign does not appear to you yet, and the arrow is not fully extracted, if you pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the skull when the arrow falls and pierces the bone, and the fluid that comes out which is on the skull, is when there is a scabies and sweating and twitching and redness in them, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and convulsions and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of food;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and maybe it will come out of the nostrils or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it will come out with speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps out of the moist sore looking like pus, and in such a way that it seems to burn as fire;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign reveals itself, if you have the cure, and extract the arrow if it is embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it hurts or rubs, is that it is near the left breast, and also seems to be pushed into something hard, not into a hollow thing;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and perhaps the arrow also becomes pus, and in white color, and comes cold and cold sweat, and faints:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you must know that death draws near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the snot when it comes out is that without a plume of foam jumps out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gazes upward and shivers with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow has entered into the covering of the thigh, take care of the small bones;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and get great weakness and great pain and sighs;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and they move all the limbs of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the snot comes out in the stomach, perhaps some meat is vomited up.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow is lodged in the belly, and it does not come out through the intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if an arrow is embedded in the bladder, and urine flows out and runs away, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	it means that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the ajutoire and the spine and the force and the cul and the legs, and the limb that seems to be affected, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery, and it does not come out, then as I will tell you what happened to me, do the opposite.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There was a man who had an arrow embedded in his neck or throat at the root of his throat:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it and dislodged the arrow from one side of the ear fat, and was healed without sensation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And he dislodged an arrow from one side of the oil fat with a stick, and the arrow was reinserted, and only the point poked him in the back, and the arrow was a great green color, and weighed down his ears;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The game was healed, and no other accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I saw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic at the ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I saw the hair, and made it grow long, and healed the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I saw an arrow in his chest or stomach, and I thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then that he passed thirty days, but his condition did not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut up the arrow, and removed it, and I drew it out, and he had no bad effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if there is a Christian who has an arrow in his butt or back, and the wound is closed;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and let the arrow stay inside him, and do not change his natural dispositions, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was closed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and it delays so much suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many others' appearances.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And there was a bolt to the king of the Prince, that was him in the middle neck, and was slightly inclined on the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the bolt was all bent.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to heal after that she had been lame for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I asked her to try all sorts of remedies, and I did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain and injury in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the bolt of the king I put on the leech and the digestive tar, so that his legs did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the bolts.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I put on the leech after three days, and resolved the wound quickly, and so much suffering lasted for a long time, until he felt the bolt inside his neck;
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put the corrosive herbal medicine on the wound for as long as it was open, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow in its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I tightened the opening of the wound with that herbal medicine, until the head of the arrow was clearly visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and I left it for three months, and then I opened the wound again, and the scar was so large that I had to use pliers on one side and pull, but I couldn't get it out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I stopped trying to use subtle and ingenious ways to get tools, until one day I got a pair of pliers, made according to the shape that will result from this chapter at the end, so I opened it, and put the wound back together.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And I see that the cartilage at the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I reset it then, and it was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or you told me the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you put your treatment on those that I did not say, because the book cannot include everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	But the master doctors compare very little thing well, and on those that are present and failing, they have nine operations and nine instruments for dealing with strange things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that the arrows should not be from the limbs except as per two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either at the entrance where they enter, or from another side;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and those that go out by way in which they enter, are arrowheads penetrating into the flesh, and should never stay stuck now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if she does not jump now, let her wait until the hocks are rotten inside, and let the birth come.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if she is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, let her wait a few days, and let her mud each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then she jumps, and if she does not jump, let him open all the small veins inside very well, until the blood flows inside, and then tie it up.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes down to one of the groins of the skull, and any of the accidents that I have said open up the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if you don't pull it out now, but let her be even for a few days, because if the arrow comes to the sinuses, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not lodged in the bone but comes only up to the sinus, and the patient remains for a few days without any bad accidents, then the device for removing it can be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if she is very stuck inside and cannot come out, if he gives her bloodletting inside, as I told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then heal the wound as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is reinserted in the neck so that it cannot be seen, and you want to find it with all your strength;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, and then take it with any suitable tool;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot take it out by pressure on the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then break it as much as the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and if you can take the arrow out, and if it has ears to hold it in place, then remove or bend the arrow until you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, and then draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull once, if the hair until the base is rotten, then try, for extraction it is difficult.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if this remedy of blood makes the patient contrary, then administer what we have said about the treatment with his ointment.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and be careful of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and do not try to extract the arrow without danger, soon or slowly, or firmly or loudly;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, and does not open anything of the body, or if the skin is swollen in a certain place, so that it can be seen or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut him down, as far as the hooks can reach, and then extract them:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it were now
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then draw it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be extracted, then leave it for now, and then begin the extraction again as soon as it comes out:
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is an arrow, put it to the whole shaft.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if there is a splinter, and you have a file, if you file the end of the splinter so that it enters into the channel of the tool;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then pour on, and if the arrow is filed, pour the file onto the end that enters, so that the extraction may be easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is lodged, then it is necessary that you cut all around the place where the arrow enters; if you can, do so, and then treat the wound as it is necessary to do.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	and if the arrow has entered or is in the chest or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cover it, you can cover it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and keep yourself from covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, for that is a job.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pliers that are used to treat arrows are similar to an eye, and thus the shape is this:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	great, middle-sized, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the butt-end is also like the beak of a bird, to fit to the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The pliers for fitting and for picking up are these.
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins from the chest
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of the veins from which one heals are XXXI; of which there is head XVI.
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	The two bats that are behind the ears, which are called "dous herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in two temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in two limbs of two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is at the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the head from the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugular veins that are at the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, which are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the two veins that are behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	Of the veins from which one commonly heals are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cerebral, and is on the left side of the neck, and it is called by lay people "voine du chief";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the name is called "fasting", and is composed of the cephalic and basilar, and they call it "vein curer";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilar is on the right side, and they call it  "vein curer", and is on the top, and this one which is said, who opens clearly on the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the little finger is the vein that is between the index and the ring finger, and if it has II rains;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and where the foot are III veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is located on the back of the hand on the left side, and the second one that is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein that is called "nerve", which is in the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are III veins of those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The ear drains after the ears that help the old catarrh, and causes migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the quality of the ear drain, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the sick person and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	and then tie the patient's neck with a rope so that the two veins appear behind the ears attached to the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	then place them on your right side, and where you feel the pulse of your right side, sign with your hand;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lance and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand up to all the vein in front, and cut it and the skin and the vein very well on both sides, and make the blood flow until you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then extract and bandage it, until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The two arteries that are in the two temples, if they are of an old age, and سودة, and a customed ophthalmia, and at the base of the tears, to the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the surgeon is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	that the patient draws his chin back until the two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse at the base of the tongue, and then sign with the index finger;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then put the knife on the vein at the top of your second finger, and cut it, and then cover the vein, so as you have done with the two veins before, and make the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then wash the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then make a cast, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have spoken about their operation and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of a frontal vein is as effective as the treatment for an ancient facial disease, and causes migraines and dizziness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	Then take the instrument which is called "a pit-drill", whose form is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or with another thing, and let blood come according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then remove the neck from the patient, and tie the vein until it is healed, and do not work a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it is not fitting for the flames to be too hot;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and the bone is close by, for the bone may break if the flames are too sharp; and the fire may die out when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The two veins that are in the two arms should be treated with hair, and for scrofula, and jaundice, and eye diseases, and diseases of oil, and skin diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is that the patient should remove his hair by twisting it with no rope, as I have described above;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Then the patient and also the sick one, and a little of the long flame a little of the wide flame, for there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	If the flames are too sharp, then break them up.
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	Then make a fire of blood, as much as you need to, and then tie it with wool, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The pain of the vein that runs through the neck is so great with water and sudden fever, and with diseases of the face, as headaches and red eyes that come into the face, even when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of pain is that the patient strangles his throat, then takes hold of the long delicate flame, and puts it between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well on its own, and now it will start to run;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not burn too much in the process, and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it alone for a night, because it is soon healed;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	is as follows:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The pain of the two armpits is helped by stretching the breast, and by the trouble of milking, and by many diseases, and by hemorrhoids, and by blisters, and it is said;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of health are such that the patient dislodges his neck from side to side, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and the master standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cutting one side of a vein, then he heals the vein long and slightly, then treating blood from time to time until it is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then he does the same on the other side, then he ties the vein, and draws it out slightly so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leaves it until morning so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the health of the lips: they help to clean in the mouth, and prevent decay of the gums, and splits in the lips, and diseases of the teeth and tongue.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of health are such that the patient sits before you, and dislodges his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then he turns the lip and looks at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and you can recognize them because they are black, and because there are small veins that are black inside of them;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	So both of them, and if you don't know them, and if you are in doubt, then do the largest one of each pair, and also do the two veins that are above and below, for it is a middle way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	So the veins that are below the tongue, then after the treatment of the cerebral vein, which is for the extraction of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the patient if that the disease is between your hands before the sun, and let the tongue lie, and look down on each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So both of them, and do not go too much to perfection, for the veins are below.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins that you treat commonly are treated according to two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	ou em poinçon à tout i flamme mirton large, ou olivière subtil si com coutés trenchens, et est appelé «anésil»;
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is called a 'mirtle', and it is wide as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the knotted veins that appear flat and contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the flame olive:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and is for saving the veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The blood from the base of the nose, which is one of these veins, goes to the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	And it comes to the patient who bleeds profusely and who warms himself with the artery that is outside of it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	If he severs the artery, and the blood flow comes, if he needs to stop the bleeding, so as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be grabbed by the flame, but cut off like this.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the base of the tooth does not open clearly, then you should extract it and change to another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or if there is no pain in it, or if you feel pain in the vein when you press on the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	then the tooth opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and hold it to the flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you can feel the pulse clearly, then you should extract the arm, touching the spot until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the spot with a pin, and then extract the arm, pressing the vein with the flame as we have said;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to hurt yourself in the artery when you mark the spot, because it is an artery.
eschui la donques.	I have received.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see coming out on top as the urine of a child, and his blood is red and thin, know that it is his artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hurry up then, and place your ear closely, then lift up your ear if it gets stiff, because it often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	Let him raise his arm, and leave it like that, and do not move the patient;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if his arm is not stiff and he comes to you, and the medicine is not given to him, if the artery is opened, for the head of the shoulder will be dislocated.
et estainche li sans.	and let it stiffen again.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig tree, and burn it, and take one of the halves and place it well until the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if he has no fever, that's good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, if the doctor, as we said, of the powders that stop bleeding;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of blood is not too great in several situations for the small wound of the leg, and the ability of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The bloodletting in the middle is good if it stops the bleeding from the head and the heart, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the doctor should cut through the nerve that is at the back, and if he cuts too much in perfection, the nerve will burst, and the wound will be painful and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person by its fineness, you must cut it with the dull tool;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and I abstained from the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two knees, then cut it short.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The relief of the cephalic pain, so that he does not go down to the head and supports the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to hit the olive flame or the merlin flame, for this is the one that saves all veins, because it does not damage the nerve or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter one first, and do not harm anything if you fail the first time, and you start again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and in case it injures some men, if you fail the first time, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the relief depends on your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about healing, if healing is only achieved to preserve health and prevent diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are or hurt:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	This is what the text says: 
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one must keep to the fast of priests for nine days and in autumn and winter after supper when the sign of satiation appears.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one must abstain from food on the first day or third day, for two hours or three times a day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The fast which is combined with illness has no fixed duration, but when need arises it must be maintained day and night in all hours.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and children should not fast until they are twelve years old, nor women carrying a child for four months until seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Doctors should not treat very old people who are over sixty years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone does fast, in whatever way, it is necessary that he vomit the contents of a light clistere if he has repressed wind, so that the veins do not draw in the excess of putrid and harmful matter to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k'il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	do not heal those who are too exhausted by meat, or by wine, as much as it may be necessary, or by dropsies; and if someone is healed after a colic, vomiting, cramping of the belly, frequent visiting of women, labor, staying up late, and all other physical activities, or due to something done with the knife or the heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then carefully adjust the humors, because he will become fat, through meat, drink, and medicine, if you have it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then let him take a bath or a dip, if anything does not benefit him, to gently remove the blood from the back of the neck between the third and fourth vertebrae, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep him away from work, drinking, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and so are the bones and joints, and let the surgeon stand higher than the one on whom he operates, and rub his arms twice or three times, then remove the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or weak, he cannot do it without pain.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the wound with his hands until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	and then moisten the surgeon's flame with a little old oil, and then put his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding a little or where he wants to cut, so that the vein does not bleed while he cuts.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that run like strings for the surgeon, and some that are so thin with wind that when you put fire on them, if you take it away quickly, they do not bleed, and thus you are from those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, for in these things it is necessary that the surgeon be wise.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if he opens the vein the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then begin again a little on the edge or above the wound, if the limbs are not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limbs are swollen and the patient hopes to get well, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	so that it may come to a head.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter or bathe, and then begin the operation if he likes it;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the fracture is small, or the bone slightly broken and you doubt that it will come out at all, then with great care and skill, break it again entirely;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a little healing, so that the legs are swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this happens often, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the leg swollen, do not recommend medicine, and put on a little oil, because it soothes the body of the blood, and is soft in that place where the oil lies; because oil is soft in this place.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and administer the oil to each wound that you heal the veins, so as to stop up the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and it also makes a treble and bowing noise when put on the leg;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so that it is subtle and moves apart when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there is a large abscess, which happens often, unless the wound has been well treated only once or the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the leg a wet sponge with some heat and a little oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the flow of blood from a vein, and if it stays in place after a few days without any discoloration or browning, then it does not harm me;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on anything of aloe or myrrh made into a paste with juice of calamus, marjoram, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And many times an abscess and appearance occur to the blood from the temple:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	So then put your hand on it, and if you find the joint soft to the touch by pressing with your thumb, then this is the appearance of illness.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	So do not put on anything of what we have said, for perhaps in a short time there will be no artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but the king makes it dry by curing it with another cure until it is well.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat every wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if it is black inside, then let it go out until it is red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see a lump, let it be thin.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are sick and have to extract blood, we make the wound larger and wider flames.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, heal them little by little, and heal them by cutting across, not by piercing;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this way of healing saves from the decay of blood and the entanglement of nerves, and it is better than long healing or wide healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And for those whose hearts are in need of healing, one should give moist wine made from pomegranate juice.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is heated, give III or IV times the juice; and if it is of cold complexions, moisten it before healing with honey syrup or aromatic syrup made with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and sweet syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he sweats in health, after the flow of blood, then it is fitting that he smell brew of wine and subtle aromatic syrup, and use the other things which we have said in the chapter or composition for fainting, to evacuate the vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up his food and is healthy again, then it is fitting that he is healed little by little according to the quantity of his continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits after the first wound, and has a strong fever, if he heals seven hours after the first wound, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who vomits in another place, should he heal on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is blood coming from within the body that causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	If a large amount of blood is drawn and the hole enlarged so that it leaks a lot through the skin;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you shall treat all the symptoms of disease, and place your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come from the skin, and this happens many times, when the healing is neglected;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not wait until you see that the arm has dislocated again, and make the blood come out a second time, and the hole is closed, so that you press firmly on it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	do not do this if it is bent, for that would be wrong;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but leave it until he has healed a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you may apply fire to the tip until the blood that has been frozen at the vein's opening comes out again, and place thereon a small piece of rope soaked in water, and press gently.;
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, let it go and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is drained.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if need be, to drain the blood a second time, if the vein is in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is attached to the vein at the base of the head because it is complex.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way of healing is such that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the veins turn red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then he should move it gently so that the vein is visible clearly, then now treat it with a needle, not from the wide end nor the long end;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and if the break is wide, and if you heal it well near the joint of the hand, and so he cannot get out of it, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until enough has passed;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is swollen, then don't dip the hand in hot water again, because you put it in more danger than when it was swollen;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the savings of the right hand is worth all the diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	extirp the hand, and pour hot water on it, as long as the vein is gone, if we can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if he has a sore throat, and cuts off all of it, so that it does not hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not trim it too much, for the nerves are all exposed and then put the hand in hot water again, if it has frozen in the wound, and cannot pull it out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and thread on it to hold it tightly together, and do the same for each finger.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The medicine for the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse; and do the same as I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The medicine of the Sophene is good for all diseases that come about in the body, as are diseases of the feet, retention of wind, disease of the kidneys, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of his throat is that the patient pours some water on it again and rubs on the vein until it stops bleeding, and lays on top of the joint at the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and if the vein is at the ankle, and above it go many ways;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	he should cut where it is wider or narrower, or at the ankle, so that he does not hurt himself.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you cut on the leg, if you keep away from the nerves that are exposed, and also cut in such a way as when you are chopping.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot get them out, put the foot back into the water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you cut it for the first time, if you start again a little higher up on top because the blood is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and so do with the other leg evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle and its pain goes up to the knee when it is for pain.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of the cut is that the patient goes in or bath, and extracts from the ankle IV fingers by twisting, because otherwise it does not open the vein;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then cut it in all ways that you can, and crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and wait until you have chopped it, for the blood is flowing, and it is very much repinned by many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't treat it, so that there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the small toe, and keep away from the nails;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and make so much heat of the wound that you see, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and hold it in place;
ele est maintenant sanee.	And he is now cured.
des sainies de ventouse	the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Vapourizers are made of horn, or of air, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and the ventilation is done according to two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	either by hurting and drawing blood, or without hurting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation that is without hurting is according to two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	either it is all fire, or not fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and the ventilation that is made by hurting and drawing blood is done in 12 places of the body, so that one is all on top;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is broken at the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and the other two are in the two coasts of the collar;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the ventuse dislociates the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the ventuse dislocates the two shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventuse on the back;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the ventuses dislocate the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the ventuses dislocate the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the ventuses dislocate the two ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the ventosis does not treat blood when it is a small opening that is scattered in the vessel, and for this reason it does not harm anyone, if only because of the small openings that are scattered in the sea;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	nor does it suffice if she is administered, nor does it matter if there is any disease that comes from overconsumption, as long as the whole body is empty;
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases one needs to be ventosed, or for habits, we administer it every hour in the beginning of the month, and at the end, and also on a daily basis;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they have to go outside, become very heavy.
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	And if it is so that those who are vendoring have repletion and reddening in their face, and in their chief, and at their neck, and darkness of eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	And those who are vendoring have a drop of blood in their mouth, and have escaped the tongue, and thirst for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if it is so that those who are dreaming, and see with bloodless eyes and confused vision and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even more so when it is hot in the month of July, we order them to be vented after three hours from daybreak.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The physician of the moon helps with the headache at the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it should not come except after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this vendoring is in the place of the physician of the head, and it should not come except from those who are of a cold disposition and who have taken a chill, for this does them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and so it is not appropriate for me to sleep without using it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured often become dizzy, and so it is necessary to place the cup a little lower by doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventilation of the neck is in place of the main vein and the base of the skull, and for this reason it is used for the extraction of the tooth, and for cutting through the jaw, and for all, and for filling;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and so it should be pressed hard because if it holds too tightly, then a stomach or gut or body part will break.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The two ribs of the neck are painful to touch, and they cause blindness and headaches, and choke, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and are in place of the main vein of the base of the skull;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you should command the physician that he press his hand on the place, so that he does not hit the artery, and does not disturb the blood flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The winds that blow from the front are very harmful to the mouth, and to the decay of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and is in the position of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windsations of the shoulders are worth illness that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The winds that blow from the front are as harmful as three veins in the arms, because they draw away blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	And instruct the patient that he not cut too deeply, because his vein is exposed and vulnerable; it can easily be cut and bleed profusely.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The wind that blows from the back is very harmful to the fundament and to the decay; it is necessary that the wind be great and wet, because it has the duty of milking well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	And if it should become subtle, then it would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The legs' windfalls open so widely because they draw blood from all the body, and are the cause of old pains in the kidneys, in the uterus, and in the bladder, and shake the flowers;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and are in the second position of the feet, and the second of the ankles, but nevertheless they weaken the body after a long use, and produce more than two diseases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The manner of applying the suction cup is that you put it first in a clear place, and suck quickly, and then place it firmly, move evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the red and inflamed place, and appear the color of blood;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	Then dry it off, and put on the suction cups again, and take care in the arrangement of the bodies, for there are some who have very hard skin, and they get sore quickly:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	if it is necessary to hurt once only, and make large wounds, and a little deep;
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the sinew is thick, if it is necessary to hurt twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time for diluting the blood of the big vein.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	and if it is very thick, then it is necessary to hurt the third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to extract blood little by little, if we only press once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	and if we want to take a lot of blood, then we start again and again;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, then we press hard and completely, and the end is that the gush of blood is sudden, and it covers someone who has thick and tough skin, and who has been burned, you should grease the leprous areas with oil that opens and dissolves:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in an open wound, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in the eye, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other thing that seems suitable.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is too cold and oily, take oil of almonds, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if they have a sore that is dry and large, then it is not necessary to put oil on, but it is necessary to wash it after the cooling of rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberries, or water of cucumbers, or water of porcelain, or other things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has moisture, if it dries up like this, or with water of myrtle, and of sumach, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great excesses rise up from old wine, or from water of suet, or from aneth or chamomile decoction, or other like things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not convenient to take a bath before the vacuum, but after the bath an hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after the vacuum is taken, and it is convenient that he warm up when he should be vacuumed and when he has been vacuumed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against those who are healing from colic, and if the sun is too high and heated;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if it is convenient that he eat cold things, as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce at the edge, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and soft porridge, and cheese of goat's milk, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, if they eat syrup of honey, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and soft porridge, and soft porridge and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and as he grows older, if he must drink more than eat.
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some men once or twice pepper or musk before the ventilation, or after, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle in his drink, but it is necessary that only those who are warm drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The ventosas that are put to hurt are those that are put on the liver, and the kidney, and the podagre, and the belly, and the buttocks, and the rain and the hainche, for this member does not suffer to be hurt on the outside, and we put it on the breasts when it is not healthy;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscous fluid that is in the member, as we put ventosas on the belly and the buttocks to ease the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is an operation or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue the operation, or moves away the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and so when one puts it on the liver and the mouse as it is retained wind, and these suction cups are emptied clean for suckling only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and never are they put together fire, nor any times plainness of water, if as the disease of pleurisy, and in such a way one fills the suction cup with hot water or water in which he has boiled herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has II width of a half palm of parfont, and has where it goes around the middle I small hole, as for to put in a needle, and is of air, before so that it does not wound the patient when one puts it on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the middle is a staff of air or iron, to take a grip, and there are great and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suckers of children are other than those of old people, and skinny than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must put this suction on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	Take the wax candle or ointment, and put it between the suction cup and the limb: let the clarity be at the bottom of the suction cup so that it doesn't burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and your hands must be in the pit that we have said: so that when one sucks, if there is steam, and take off the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the ointment as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup that has been used for pleurisy disease, there is no need for a wick or pit, and it is only used when it is plain of water, and put on the limb only slightly;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	are not created with such small members that they cannot be put into a cup for their smallness, as the lips and gums and similar things;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in their nakedness of limbs, as the deer and does and others;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of using them so is that when you find limps that are in clear fresh waters without danger, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them into a pot in fresh water, as long as they are friendly and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be healed with the cup and the vacuum, then rub the member until it is red, and put the limps on;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are clear, and have 치유, then it is put on, for this is worth more later.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the limb up, and then of water, very well, and then squeeze it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if he leaves his back too long after the chest of the swines, so that it is moistened by a cold drape, and put on, as long as the swine is swollen.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if he has many swines, so put on vitriol powder, or scabs, and similar things, as long as they are swollen.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or put on half a handful of peeled peas, and leave them to burn at the fire, so now they will cool down.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more work, then take other swines.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the swines will not take it, so frolic the fire of the blood, or put there a needle as long as the swine gives off blood, and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, so burn.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are squealing, so sprinkle on a little powder of aloes and sawdust, or ashes, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapter of calumny is necessary many times in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of a fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know then, you sons of bitches, that the wise men are soaked in this chapter, that you will never find such a thing in any of the old books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	And for this reason, the science is strange to us in our land, for I have never found any good one.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and has summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom sets forth her understanding, and holds fast to truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture, dislocation, twist, or strain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the patient from both sides, unless something stops him entirely, as in the case of a weak neck, or an obstruction, or an old man;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	If he is very thin, or too often hungry,
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and do not drink any cold wine, nor any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt about the heat of the abscess, or the expansion of the substance in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	If the patient returns to their normal way of life without considering these things.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that produce great thickness, or viscosity, like cooked flour in water, and rice, and eggs, and pies made from goat's milk, and cheese, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with great nutrition healing begins more quickly and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones broken from old age or frail people cannot recover or harden the limbs according to their nature because of the lack of blood in the members, nor those that are too soft, as with the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but do not heal, return to the broken bone and large joints that join the limb together, as much as it hardens as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and not at all of his work, and for this it is necessary to feed him with large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the head is other than the break of the foot or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in twisting, as if the cutting of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break that is all a small fracture.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each has its own device, and its own specific tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes back in place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is understood the breaking of the bone because its edge is twisted, and open well from the side, and presses by the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no torus, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can have torus, or split, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it by hand alone, but put on medicine that comes here after, and then restrained now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break which has happened in the arm, and are the two parts separated, it is now necessary to put them in an equal way, so that the nails come out;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and when the nails come out, if he leaves no gap, as long as the abscess is calmed down;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	and then make it equal to the wound that you can easily and cleanly, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration of him who has pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	and then hold it, as it is convenient hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if the extension of the two parts is short or long, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or two strings, or one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural form, so that when the parts of the broken member are restored, you restore them by all means to their places as easily as you can, and keep that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and join well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel it well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	If the dressing is applied well and not too much, and do not press it as those who bring it about by their ovraige, an abscess hot and contracted to the limb, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are in place, so that the patient does not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, turning or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and keep the limb well secured so that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when one feels no pain, then it is not in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a position that one feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and guard so that it is placed correctly, so that there is no tortuosity when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken member is diverse in smallness and greatness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, as arms and legs and similar things:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	If it is necessary to wrap linens that are soft and fine.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those who are thick, such as the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	If it is necessary to wrap with a broad and sturdy linen, because the broad linen envelops the entire limb, holding it evenly from all sides so that there is no itchiness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then tie it lightly, three or four times according to the limb, and hold one hand on all of the linen, then go up above the break and hold it less, so that the break comes a little away;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the linen little by little, until you press a great deal of the skin, then take another linen and wrap it very tightly above the break;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the sore part of the break and hold it with moderate pressure, not too strong or too gently, as we said in the first line above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	and place between the linen threads or drapes, as long as they are all even, then tie it tightly above the bandage, and then put your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	If there is swelling or an abscess, place something soothing on the abscess to soothe it and let the swelling go down, and leave it like that for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then put your splints on, and let them be of half a cane of sawn wood, or of a beam, or of palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the splint that one puts on the break is a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also as far away as necessary for the limb's size, whether small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	and stretch on the poles also as you did in the first hour, then tie up above it a thread forwardly, as in the first hour on the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	then narrow it up, gradually lessening the tightness.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and let the thread be light, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish men who make ropes out of linen twine, and that is a great mistake, because the length cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it only deserves to be less than half an inch between each pole.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the hooks of the stars after extraction in their healthy state, then let them be bound with linen, or another kind of rag, so that they do not get cut.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise, and the cure is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to extract stars from all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to put poles before five or seven days, or more according to the urgency of the abscess, which sometimes heats up suddenly.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and consider the method of the ancient empirics in restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that holds on the walls of the mill, and confound it with much honey, and put this confection, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster restoring the fracture to many dispositions, especially to women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another way of the plaster restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the twist:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take 3 ounces of alum and 2 ounces of saltpetre and nettle and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, mixed;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, mixed;
alechil VIIII З.;	alchich
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into a powder, and mix it with honey of bees;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the patient's complexion is warm, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Other way to cauterize than by fire:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	Take mugwort and vinalda, half a pint.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	Mirrortree and aloe, half a pound.
acaice VI З.;	Ointment, six drams.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Boil the arnica well and grind it with oil or plenty of vinegar, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Other way to cauterize joints and broken bones from their place, and to soothe the pain immediately, and to trim the bone, and the wound:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Take another new, and moisten it with boiled oil, and put on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cysts do not respond well, but they are good for soothing abscesses and properly relieving pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Other way to cauterize which restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dried fig leaves and earth-paeony leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to make an ointment for healing bone breaks and reducing the swelling of an abscess: take fresh milk and mix it with wine, then apply it to the affected area.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of vinalda, chamomile, violets' flowers, flour of vitre, each a part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and crushes, and mixes with wine, and heats the members, mixing them with water of coriander or vinegar, and uses it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to make an ointment that is more effective than the first one, which is used when the abscess is persistent and difficult to heal: take milk, wine, and water, each in equal parts, and apply it hot to the affected area.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of marsh-mallow, and linseed, mullein, mallowe, and fennel grass, and flowers of violet and chamomile, each one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and crushes, and mixes with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, I hypocras says that one should not put anything on the broken member before it is healed, except a cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to me that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another way to burnish that is good for wounds and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take muck and straw of cows, or feathers of geese, and marsh-mallow, and string it evenly, crushing it, and making it into a paste and lying on it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then he undoes it after one day, and takes care that the patient feels no pain, and that his bone does not move from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	If they do not dislodge by their own hand.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if the pain comes to a head, or itchiness, or a restlessness or swelling occurs, if you hurry and dislocate it, and apply the poultice now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water moistened, and dip it in the water, and raise it to the head, as long as the itchiness ceases, and the pain is soothed;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with water or oil of roses, and tie it to a pole, as long as you are sure of the abscess heating up;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and let the inflammation of the member rest, and be eased of pain, then begin to dislocate again gently, and a little bit of ointment, and do not dislocate it as strongly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and carefully as long as he is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is chafed and red and painful and swollen all around it, and you have to use poultices and ligatures, then start again, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	If the limb does not respond to any of the above treatments, then do not dislocate it until after three, four, five, or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and never let it rest for more than twenty days, according to what one observes, until the break-up of the joint appears, and approach the dislocation of the shoulder with care;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then take even greater care than before, and let his meat grow thicker, as I have said above;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and know that if the skin dries up more than is necessary, it cannot be moved;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	then rise immediately after each dislocation, and do so every third day, and let the shoulder rest for a moment;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	For in this work, cut off the skin carefully around the limb, and gently remove what is loose, so that the limb may return to its normal position;
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is unwholesome, and if it is done out of fear, and I see no other thing than to make it loose and do it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways to break up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breaking, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	For it has fractures that are made by the impact of a sword, and the neck bone is broken all the way down to where it joins the body, so much so that it comes off like a stump;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and this is called "hematoma".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	or the sword pierces the bone from above, and it is called  "absolute" fracture.
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and it is the wound of those two great fractures or one small fracture.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	Or if there is percussion inside, or an edge, or a collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a breaking that approaches the tendon which is over the bone, or is under it, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that closes in the bone as fine as hair, and it is called a "capillary" fracture.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound is made by a stone or by falling, or by some other thing, and brings in a piece of bone; and if the joint is dislocated as the blacksmith does to the kettles when he shapes them.
si entre li piere dedens.	if between the stone inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And if there is more moisture at the top who have or head moist bones, like the head of a child;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it has all these ways of fracture that small pieces are lost as if they were stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will talk to him in his place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and by the inspection of wounds, and by the cart that is before it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by this: when one has uncovered the bone, and rubbed it in, thus opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, take care as to the accidents of the disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, feverishness, or hair growing furiously red and other similar signs in many conditions, so it cannot be healed by doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can do.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone may not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of may come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the skull, so that you bend the bent part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and is that you squeeze the head of the sick person, and uncover it on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more easily than you can, and let the blood come out at the cover of the bone or at the abscess, help yourself to what is necessary, and is that you fill the place with wet towels in oil of rose;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest as long as the abscess is calm, and be sure of the evacuation of blood;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to pierce the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one way is that you cut at a narrow angle at the front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I bottle another way more than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second way is that you have many different lengths of blades, some narrow and others wide, and sharp, and made of iron:
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and in work lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you pierce it from inside, so that you introduce blades with tangents, not completely through so as not to pierce the bone's end, and must have above the point a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you will have many, so that each one comes back to its place in the end of the bone, so that you are patient for all tests.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And this is the form of the three ways to be patient:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing between the bones is that you put the stop in place on the bone, and turn it back to its two positions as you know that the bone has been pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	Then put the stop on the other side again a little way apart and so do all around, then cut out the space of the bone that is between the pits, and do it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the tools that you have there, such as tweezers, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and make sure that you do not touch the skull or the medicine;
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if you can see that you need to remove the marrow which is delayed in the bone from all other instruments resembling an incisors, but it must be more pliable and finer than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if there is no delay in any small bones, nor scales, if the bone is lightly held to the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then heal the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other way to treat it is that which Galen says, which is more effective;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and the fire very hot, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the break is open; so that when you have discovered that part, you put the head of this lens-shaped incision there, from which it gets its shape.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and this side is water in two places, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	and then hammer a small mallet on top, so that you lightly chop the bone all around, and be very careful of the splinters which are scattered;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it's broken to the bone, then the bone is a little injured, because a strong bone causes pain and discomfort.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then hit with a small mallet on top, so that you lightly tap the bone all around, and take good care of the tendon that is attached to it; if it is caught on the bone, then carefully cut the bone, for one cuts the bone well without hurting, and without fear.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are dealing with very sharp razors, and then with even sharper ones, and do not stop doing this as long as it is necessary.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other hair-splitting and subtle wounds, you must proceed according to their alignment.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	This is not something that can be easily fixed by someone who has not studied this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is suppurating, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dip it in oil and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another cloth, double it II or III times, dip it in wine and oil and put it on top of the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do it as lightly as you can so that you don't aggravate the wound, then cover it with another cloth, and don't peel it off until it has healed completely;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it remain so for a day or two, until the abscesses are calm, then remove it, and administer medicines as roots of licorice, flour of times, incense powder, aristaology, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines immediately without stinging;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and guard that the wound be clean, so you don't let it get infected, nor do you let it gather bowels, for when the bowels gather on the cloth of the skull, if they are cut and torn, they cause great harm to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when one puts a mordant medicine on it, it burns from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if black comes out only because of the medicine that has been put on it, and its virtue is such, then you should squeeze a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one drape of rosin, and put it on the medicine;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the cure by the methods he knows how to do until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that the two parts of the neck above are never broken, or one by itself, because they are bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and this cartilage does not break unless it is forced or twisted, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your little finger or nipple of the neck, and make it even with your index finger at the back, until the neck regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, so that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come back to its place, then you must put it right with a small stick at the top of the neck.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if he is broken in two places, then do otherwise, and hurry to restore the first part the next day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess has calmed down, then insert at the top of the neck a few strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one place.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	And you put one on top of the other on another side, if it breaks.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the tents be so large that they fill the apertures from which they come.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And no one should restore it without wetting the strips first; each day they must be changed.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be wet in the preparation of ash of ovend and powder of mill;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And never put goose feathers in the place of tents, and if it is a sodden drape, and holds the break, and blows the sickness about.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	Or fare a lieu de quille une branche d'arbre, et la tige pendante; et la tige ne tienne pas par le haut, mais seulement par le bas avec des visages de bois;
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess comes to birth while you are working, put cotton soaked in oil or a string of hempen twine or a piece of silk; or
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess forms, so that it is pus, then put there by the side, flour of sizings, and powder of incense, prepared with ash of ovend, then put on light poultices, and do not bind the lou nes;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if his break is small, he is broken into small pieces, so extract with the suitable instruments to him, then cut the fracture, and the cure of things injangling car, and souding, yes as plasters and ointments suitable to him;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if he has no pain inside his neck at all, if he cures the tens, and puts wires of lead, as long as he is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the breaking of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not shattered into two pieces, but rather twisted inside, then one should handle it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is convenient, if his break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if his break is on the left jaw, if you put your index finger of your right hand into it, and push the break in gently, and make it equal with the other hand from the side, and make it long.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is on the second side, then it is fitting that you equalize the two sides with an extension, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if the movement inside is, or a tear, if you extract it with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put the wax on the broken jaw, and put a double cloth.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and on the loins put a great well-made shield, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it to the neck where you can, and order the patient that he rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the figure changes, so let it rest for three days, and then put back in place what has changed;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and apply plaster to it, with powder from the mill with much chalk or flour of buckwheat, after you have removed the cast;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and on the plaster another light lining, and if the plaster hurts, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	is sometimes healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses arise, if you administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not remove any piece of the bone when the wound is healed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	If subtle of the ostrich are suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, if you open it by fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et when you have boned all these pieces, and there is no delay, so to cool the wound, if it is wide, and put on it I bandages suitable for this, in order to ease the pain, as long as it is healed.
de la forcele	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output and nothing else:
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The breaking of them several times before, against the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	where it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	where there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work if it is so that the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds up the shoulder that was broken by the force of the break;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then set the break even on both sides so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair-splitting;
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you have more to stretch, so stretch the shoulder of the patient with a round stake of cloth or linen, and make it big according to your need;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and hold it firmly, and hold the needle in your hand, so that you make an even hole, as is right.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot remove the head of the pole at the end, so that it comes out perfectly, it is necessary that the patient lie down on his back, and place the shoulder pole horizontally, and put the ministers' shoulders under it, until the bone of the pole is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then place the break on your two hands, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you split above;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and try to press the pieces together lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, then put the cap on one of the incisions that you have made;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but that you remove the needle this instrument, to protect the patient.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and seems like a spoon, and is not hair-like, and should also be as wide as it is necessary for the size of the bone and the ability of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and has two heads, as you see, and one is wide and the other narrow, like the break in the wound that you made when you broke the bone;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are confident of the temperature of the abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt about the temperature of the abscess, if the wound is covered with linen and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if it has oil in it, and water and vinegar, and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and lacerations, is that you put on the bone the plaster from the powder of the mill and the owl's dung, and lightly apply it, and put a spike on the joint if you need to do so.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very long band of a palm's width, then put two layers of linen cloth over it, and the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a thin stick of three fingers' width and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the top of the bandage is even.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and put the stick on the break in the bone, and turn the bandage over the neck, and extract the joint cleanly, and extract the ill joint.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and the dislocation of each part, and when you see that the opening holds the broken bone in place, and you clearly see that the spine does not move over the broken bone, if it is reduced every day, and when the ligature is removed, if it is restrained;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and place the patient on their back, and put a small board under the shoulder, in order to raise the dislocated part upwards;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the fracture of the arm is eased by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes about, until 20 days have passed;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then start the treatment again if you see that it is necessary, and hold him back and leave him like that until he has recovered;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and she has been restored in 28 days, and in some men less.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	But if the shoulder is broken, or out of place and does not move smoothly, and it only hurts when touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	If you reset it according to its natural shape, and do so in all possible ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	Then put on the shoulder with a powder of the mill, with plenty of flour, and light strokes, and put it in a double drape.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	Then put on a large and thin board, a little wider than the shoulder, and descale it at the edge of the shoulder, if you employ the hair of the cloth, so that the board is even.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	And then tie it with a large and strong bandage, so that the board does not move from its place, and inspect it every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	And each time that it moves, if you tie it again, and make the board even if it is out of place, and let the patient lie on his back.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	And the shoulder is reset in XX days or in XXV.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the number of days is completed, if it dislocates again, and be careful, for it is not bone that moves so easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone projects forward, and there is no smooth surface to stop it, then make it up and bone it over, and do as we said in the breaking of the jaw to relieve an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the pie
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The feet are never broken in midair, but this happens sometimes;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	But it often breaks at the bottom.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it leans towards the side, and causes great pain to the patient, and there is no alane [a kind of plaster], then sometimes it vomits blood, and opens the veins in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the reset so that the patient lies on his back, and put a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and carefully join the ribs with your hands, and adjust them in every way as well as you can, until the bone figure is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	Then put on plasters and stoppers above it with subtle salt or another light stuff, and wrap it in a garment, and lay it on the broken bone, so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the loins smoothly to the back, and hold it forward, and release each hour, and if it relaxes, so hold it.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to separate it, because of corrosion or because of itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, if you hurry, and separate it, and scrape the plaster, and apply it in a way suitable for treatment;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then remove the plaster, and hold it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	the break of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of the ribs does not come except in large lumps behind the back, and at the top inward, and do not bend them too much except for those which are painful.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and the smell is good to the question how it was done.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restore them so that you make the break even, as it is fitting.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on plaster, and hold it with a stake, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of the ribs goes inward, then the patient feels great pain and a stinging sensation, as if it were crying, because the bone does not stretch the skin.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and let it cool with water, and every day and vomit great quantities of blood, and this is a deadly disease, and the old ones have great pain in their limbs.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push the break away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless hot absesses come, if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let the healthy one.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they said that one should put leeches on the wound to draw out the pus, and this is apparently reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	However, doubt remains that leeches do not attract excess fluid to the wound due to their weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that we must cover the place with another moisture in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space even, then it is cured of the cure of plague, of meat, and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain in the bone that touches the wound, and doubt remains with the patient, then it is necessary to split the skin of the chest, and it is necessary to put a tool there to protect the wound;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound together, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it is well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses appear, if they are put on drapes soaked in oil and placed on the bed.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat while the head of this, which is due to an abscess, and is gizzing along the back or side where it is necessary, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break in the throat
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	No time comes that breaks the bones of the neck, and what happens is that he bleeds;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also at the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see whether he will be well or not, if you notice that his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many cases, and if it does not move and feels well when it is stretched out, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if one puts medicine on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things happen to the back, and you can not know whether it is healed or not, if the bones are softened, and if the accident that happened was due to a fall, and on the back has windiness and excretion without will;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it is treated with a poultice on the belly, if there is windiness and excretion without will;
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is soothed on his back and he tries to move, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	If I don't work hard at my healing.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the cure is that if you treat an abscess with hot oil or oil of meadow mustard, until it is calmed down;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then put on one of the plasters, drying it and binding it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and don't sleep in that part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if some bone comes loose, if you cover it with poultice;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and set the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment made from vinegar, until it is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the bone of the shoulder is broken, which is called the "shoulder joint", pour out your poultice from your left hand, and hold it even with your right hand, then put on the plaster and wrap it up, if you need to;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And hold it in place, and if there is an excess of bone, cut it off, and the bone, and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the fracture of the shin bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	May it happen that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, may there be only a little reduction at the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	And make it long, and decline it in the parched, and comes to the patient pain at the place, and swelling, and that which breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the setting-right that is, you extend your hand upon it, as long as you are on the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know what is the break and the form of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the break is at the head, let it be made equal, as long as it is in its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on his stomach, as long as the setting in place of that break is convenient to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have made it equal, put on it a plaster, and then put on a wooden or wooden stake, and hold the break so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and set the bones back together along the sides, as long as the hole is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if there is a fever, if it does not cause a fever, as long as the abscess is calm, and put on what we have said above;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to restoration, and hold it firmly as necessary, if there is no bad accident;
et c’est li maniere.	This is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	For the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder accessory is that which is between the collar and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of the two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	where one is that you take a strong rope, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie two knots in the rope, and raise them up high, and cut the sick person on one side;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then tie some arms of the rope to the beam, so that it comes down to the ground, and take one end of the rope and hold it with a strong hand behind; then, after having raised him up with your feet, let him fall on his back;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then make the mirror even with his hands together, as it returns to him as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one sways the sick person on his back, and he lays his hand on his throat, then orders two ministers that one bleeds who is on the breeze-block with his hands, and the others bleeds all over the body, and extends each to its side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then strip off the flesh of the wound, and on the wound, and each minister extends to its side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the mirror is close to the shoulder blade, you should put a rope around the shoulder and another one across the chest, away from the mirror.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	And if the mirror is away from the chest, you should put the rope lightly, without effort, as the mirror is even on its side and on its height;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Then make the mirror equal, as it should be, and hold it in place, so that the incisions do not move.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if the incisions have come, do not hold them in place for more than seven days, and put a wet cloth and oil on it, until the incisions are healed;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	Then hold it in place, and the way to hold it is that you put plaster on the mirror, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and wrap the cloth around it, and support on the shoulder, and on the arms so that the arm is in line with the elbow, if there is nothing to defend it or if the bone has not been broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stakes, and place over the fracture a wider and stronger stake than the others, and keep between each stake two spaces, and make each stake as large as it passes three spaces on both sides.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then support on the stakes, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the paste over the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the stakes and the support, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and doubt the incision, leave it tied for seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then watch each for three days that the itch does not spread to place, or that the healing does not come to the member because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the adhesive, as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if such an accident does not happen, so that the dislocation is not relieved within three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put a clean piece of linen around the shoulder with care that the figure of the member does not move, or that the ligaments are not relaxed;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if it is given by the virtue of medicine, and he is given the food that we have prepared in advance, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle level;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, if it is heavy.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is proper that the shoulder and the leg should be recovered in ten days altogether;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And then he must untie and administer baths and medicines for relief.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is bad and tight, it should not be unbound for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "humerus," one of which is small, and this is the one that connects to the hand.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and this is the one that goes back towards the little bone.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	Perhaps the large humerus can break alone, or perhaps the small one, and maybe both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small humerus is broken, the healing is easy, and so is the recovery;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	And when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when both are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small flail that is bruised only slightly, if it is necessary to stretch it lightly and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	If it's just the large humerus, then we need to extract it with force;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and stretch it out on a table, and turn the hand so that the thumb is higher than the other fingers, and the little finger lower than the others, and let the patient be stretched out across it, and the thigh in front of him higher up, so that the patient doesn't feel any pain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the ministers their arms to the dislocation of the shoulder to his hand, or to his neck, and other ministers to another above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then make it even according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage there are pieces, let each one be placed in its place, and if one of them does not hold fast to its place, you shall put a pin through it, and you shall not restore it to its place, but mend it on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the breaking there is a wound, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if in the difficulty of restoration of the wound there are abscesses, then dip a cloth made of oil rosin and white wax, which is neither too hard nor too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and I will drape it gently over the top, until the abscesses are calm.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then the oil, and I put the plaster of the powder of the mill with a lot of wax, because put the splints, and the splint of the break is next to it, and a little more wide than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that he should have six splints or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	so that the fracture is in one of the bones, or in II.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and stretch it over the break more than any other part, and always less by stretching, as I said at the beginning about the paste;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the drape that are over the break be soft and wet, and not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the fabric, which is stretched, be of linen, not too thick nor too fine, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if some bad accident comes to the limb, such as itchiness that comes to the limb, let it be soaked with lukewarm water until the itchiness is relieved;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest neither tight nor loose.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again with the extraction, and if the ligament is relaxed and the bone is dislocated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it is necessary that the healing not be affected by the member, because it is too constricted, then soften it slightly and leave it thus for a few days, until the healing has improved, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the illness, so do not cut off until after 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or, in the case of wounds, then wrap his hands around his neck, and make his necks even, and prevent movement and injury, and let him sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and knows that this breaker is cured in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20, according to the qualities and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	And know that at the back of the hand and to us the two have few breaks, and there comes but a little pain many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or swollen, so that the patient cries out, and sits straight before him evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the tabletop, and spread out the minister's bones that are broken, and make them even the mirrors, as long as they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and put on plaster and staw, if abscesses do not come, then he puts a stake according to the quantity of the place;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in a sheet of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the breaker is in the armpit around the belly of the plant, so make a spike of linen, and order the patient to strap it to his broken plant;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then the stretching of a long rope, and its string is as great as the palm of the hand, and is stretched, as it should be.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it is broken at the back, so that you put a steele on, and another desoze in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and stop the blood between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	If it breaks on either of the two sides, let it be pulled out, if it is caught, so that it remains equal, as it should be;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and stretch it with the palm, and if you see that it has a small straight stake to lift the break, and does not move;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the break is like either of the two sides, that it is equal, and binds with the sound one who is after;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind all together, so they do not move, or you put on a stake, as if it were caught;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the abscess, and protect him who comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken rib
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bones of the hip are often broken, and one can clearly see them when they move forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is good if we lay it on top of the fracture, and another above it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies down, then each minister extends his bond to his side evenly;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	is when the fracture is closed up.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	If the fracture is close to the root of the rib, then one of the ties is on the inside of the rib, and the other ties are on the outside of the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And if it is near the knee, then the bond is loose and the extension downward;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then set the bone evenly with his two hands as it is in its natural position, and then put the plaster, and the bandages, so that there comes no blood.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a fever, let it rest, then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The time is made in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap it up tightly on the wound with a hard cloth twice over or three times over, and leave aside the excess, then turn the leg around so that the heels come to the root of the naissance, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, free the knee from the thread, and bring the head of the thread up.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then turn around on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the wound some wooden splints, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then employ the fire between the leg and the thigh of linen threads so as to make even the tying, then begin to tie in form III or IV on the wound;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go up on the wound, and less the tying;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then take the two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the thigh, and tie III splints that are above them, then go back to the end of the thread at the head, as far as you come from the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and restrain, so that it does not move from its place, then let it be, then if it comes to an abscess or floreat or other.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it happens, if it dislocates, and moves back in place, and comes again, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of bone that he grabs, if it is necessary, let him do it;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it cannot be done, if it is necessary to split the place, and pull hard;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And never break the pelvis in this way, as when the shoulder or arm is concerned;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	however, in the restoration made in this way, the patient does not become ill.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the chest is restored in a day, or less or more, according to the diversity of complexities.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the pit of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	that in the pit of the knee there is little fracture, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is only a crack or a hole, and comes to all wounds, and not wounds, and this feels wrong.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that he places what is long at its two ends, as much as it can be assembled so that it can move;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	and then set the plaster, and I put a round stick, if you need it, and hold it as necessary, then return all the dispositions that we have said in other breakers, like hot abscess and other similar things;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then to each injury what he deserves, as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 knows that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and all the breaks are like those of the arm, and so its restoration is also equal to that of the arm, and the work is complete. And if the two bones break together, then the leg returns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the bone is broken, then turn back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and it can be seen clearly;
et torne desoz.	and return sober.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then extend it, and make it equal, and bind the tendons equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	However, if it is broken, it is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be lighter and less severe;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and equal it according to your art.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have finished your work, take two long hair-braids and purple them the legs from the ankle to the foot on both sides, and let them be long enough for the feet;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them around the legs above and below, and bind them together in the middle, and at this bind the legs so that they do not hang to one side or the other, and so it is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and there are no berets on the legs, and if necessary, put one leg forward to prevent movement, and properly make this wound in the fracture or where the injury is;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move each leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the patient as long as he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot there is a fracture in some cases, and in many cases it does not happen, but only is injured.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones rub against each other, if the patient as long as he is healthy. If there is a break in the bones of the foot, put your foot on its own, so that where the bones are raised, then press them together until they come back into their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put plaster on it and press it down, and make a small table of II flat boards, then tie it to the foot in front, and then that you have wrapped bandages around it, and other things that you need to do.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three or four days have passed, if the joint is still dislocated, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or not.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if there is one of the two broken, then restore them, as we have said about the bones in the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	and then on the two side cut a stone according to the length of the two, and one little more wide, and then set in the foot that I said, and draw out with care;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are II or III, or more, cut on each of the two a stone according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and draw out the foot that is sore with care;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be standing on the head of the foot that is sore so that it well shades it;
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things that I said to break with care, as soon as we have said;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and cut each accident as it comes.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	the break of the bone between the knuckles
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the woman's bones are broken, if she is made to sit wide, then she leans on the back part and is held by behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	and fill the bag with the cotton of the disease, and put it on as big as I am.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	Then bring the woman to stand, and tie her neck and back little by little, and then let the cotton go, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and returns the bones with the strap.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she goes to urinate, if the cotton comes out, and when she has finished, put it back, and do so for seven days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	then the break will be healed, and if you see anything, take a bladder of beef, and tie a cord to the peritoneum, and pour all of the bladder into nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the cord until the bladder is inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	and nature will bring back the break;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for a few days, until it is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the arm is broken, or that of the woman, so as to restore it as we have said in the leg bone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into them, and hear my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fracture means many different things depending on the right path of restoration:
enten le donques.	Let us then begin.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the groin, when it is broken, take an goose's neck and insert it into the groin;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	Then wrap around the drapelets, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed without an hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has broken with wound, great or small, such as the hip bone or shoulder or similar, to be healed now, so that the wounds which we have said bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, if the vitriol burn remains, if you have nothing else, then start to restore the broken one in the same hour or day, when the blisters come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the blisters come, if you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm, and do not touch them on the third day or the fourth, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on top of the skin, then you must put it out of joint lightly with your hands, in small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extensions do not appear to you to be equal to your hands, so that they can hold this instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight long fingers and whose breadth is determined by the quantity of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary that he take three or four times the amount of the medicine according to what is needed in each healing of a broken bone.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member when it is wrapped up, and be larger in front and thicker in the middle: thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	is called "palatine", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the top of the prominent bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and be stretched out once, until it recovers, and be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you must chop off the head of the bone as long as the instrument has the power to do so.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, with the help of an appropriate tool, be it a chisel or a saw, at your power:
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then remove what is left in the bone with sharp and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been set back in place, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If it is in its place, then soak it in black vinegar, and properly so if it is in a solution.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put anything on the wound except oil, or anything else that has oil, so that it does not cause inflammation and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer the salves when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover all around it, according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not pulled with the break;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times have done this foolish trick, and have caused the patient to die or be corroded once;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the extraction be softer and less painful than that of the other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it is not good to put any salves on;
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap tightly in linen, instead of wool, hard cloth, and tie it tight.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days to form a boil on the wound, then if you have put anything that you have put on all over, and you put a healing ointment, as a four-fold ointment and its likes.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are arranged in such a way that the boil runs down轻松.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it passes and he cannot join but runs together, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so that you must cut the wound with a knife, and all these painful pieces that come out.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to light, or any other kind of corruption, then it is necessary that you cure it according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and opened up on the member, as the hip bone or shoulder bone, and other similar members, do not pull it out, for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it putsrefies.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	Maybe it will heal itself in about 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you can't, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	These bruise which come by the sudor
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come after the health of the broken one, especially when it is near a joint, and an ugly thing it is to see the shape of the member;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and maybe can't do the natural work of the members.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Take care, then, if we free it:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if he administers harsh medicines, as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sulfur, or any of these things alone, or all together, and mixes them with wine infused with vinegar or with a lot of ink, or with honey;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the neck in steps, and hold them firmly, and do not let them slip out of your hands every day;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislodge it, and start another one, until the knots are cut;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or hold onto a piece of canvas that is well made;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of canvas is that it cuts off all the swellings from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot is already hard like a stone, and it needs to be opened up, so as to cut off the surplus, leaving what appears to be the excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or hold onto a razor at all times until it is cut, and treat it until it is healed;
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the jail
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the break in the bone has healed, and there are still weak and delicate limbs, this may happen because of:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	because one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as tightly as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	Or why is there too much hair, and cannot come to the member's recovery?
ou por multitude d’arosement;	Or why is there a lot of inflammation?
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	Or why are there great movements, not in their hour?
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	Or why does the patient have little blood in his body, and is weak?
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body tender, until the blood increases in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give him baths, and give him joy and massage;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts the great recovery, and is wet often with warm water, until the recovery runs to the member;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two limbs twisted after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the member is twisted after the restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet does not lose its natural work:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	If you don't believe the foolish people who say that a member should be broken altogether when it is new, and many foolish people have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these chapters are to blame, and great evil comes from them, and perhaps death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	However, if the joints and tortures are hot, or if herbs with a soothing action are cooked, as well as leaves of mallow, roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and if the patch is made with a soothing substance, well done like a good squirt, and you take the musk of mallow, and confound it with linseed oil or seed oil, and make an ointment;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or if you take fig leaves, and grind them with hay of coleswort, and other medicines that soften the feeling of pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the neck moved by constantly and long-term friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so let there be movement in each limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the curvature is strong and stiff, as in the case of a stone, it must be cut with a sharp knife lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and put on leach-cloth and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back by gentle movement.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, if the veins swell, and by chance if one puts it back at the same level;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	because it is not good that one moves it when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	it often brings spasm and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when it comes, make the patient well, then let it be, as long as the abscess is calm;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the member with hot water and oil, then move it lightly, and mend each member as the cure comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the antidotes for dislocations of the shoulders up to the tip of the finger.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Note that the jaws may be dislocated upwards, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	They are a little bone from their legs, and slightly softened.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	They are completely dislocated, and hang down to the chest, and cause saliva to flow from the mouth so that they cannot hold it in, nor close their mouth, and wrap their tongue around with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are small, return them with many different positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	If it is complete and finished, then you must take her to the hospital right away, do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	And in such a way that the minister of the sick person ties the head, and pulls it with a little rope from one side of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, so that the dislocation is on two sides.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other two hands are away, to make it even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And order the sick person that he soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let him set his head to rest at equal intervals until it is back in place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if it is brought back, most certainly the two jaws are together, so they are raised with hot water and oil, until they are gently reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	Do not tarry to bring me back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back in even fashion, and the mouth of the sick person is well sealed with a mollifying balm, then put it on drapes moistened with oil and wax, and then lighten it gently by moving it.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the sick person sleep on their back, and have their heads between two pillows so that they do not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to turn over, but eat light food until the pains are relieved and the jaws are set.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat lightly, and do not bother to open the mouth for eating or drinking until the jaw is well set and healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their places within an hour, and are not restored to their natural positions, then fever and heat set in customarily, and by chance there is an upset of the stomach, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of recovery.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times dies those who have it, in nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not dislocate from inside the neck in the continuation of the windpipe and is dislocated at all times from the outside, and it can be felt clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the cure is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder that is next to the neck cannot be dislocated;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if not, and if it dislocates at all, then you put it back in place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the plaster and bandage, and holds it in place, and instructs the patient to rest as long as he is not well;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and also the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder can only be dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	is dislocation due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the foot of the leg.
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance it dislocates at the top, and there is pain.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the neck;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and many times it dislocates forward towards the axil, but at those who have dislocated their shoulder, because that is very serious, for that one will often be hospitalized;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	at those who have enough dislocation, they are healed, and return to their normal state.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens that some men have a hit or a break, and the shoulder swells up with hot fever, and one believes that it has dislocated from this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	So then you must test it out, as long as you are certain of it;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And there are two types of dislocation when it goes down towards the axil, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and remove the collarbone from the shoulder blade, as if it were an eye.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor make any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and if it is dislocated above, then it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly at the table;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation cannot be fixed unless it is new, or the patient has fallen ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the minister hold the patient's hand high up, then you remove the collarbone, and push the joint back into place with force.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister holds the hand high up, and then puts it back in place;
si venra hastanment.	so come to the hospital.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said, that the patient be bathed in hot water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and administer moistening and soothing preparations, as is done with an infusion of alfalfa and fenugreek and melilot in water, and let it be prepared;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then bring the patient to lie down on their back, and fasten a strap of equal length on one shoulder, neither too tight nor too loose, then put the foot of the affected leg on the strap, and gently pull up the head of the shoulder with your hand;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and others minister to the patient's head so that he does not move around;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	now bring back the shoulder, and see if it comes back in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and let a more experienced person be present who is larger than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and turn him away from the side, and fasten the shoulder of the patient, and lift it up so that the patient hangs;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And other ministers draw the arm of the sick man down towards his navel.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, with nothing heavy enough to hold it, the dislocation comes back again.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And this is how they do it in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and stick a long piece of wood into the ground, so that the head is as far from the ground as a pistol, and not too thick or too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it is placed under the sick person, but with a bed sheet over them, and the sick person is lying on the long wood;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then their hand is extended down from the other side forming a shape, and the joint will come back to its place completely;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	if it does not return to its place for all these things that we have said, then this is the treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	Take a piece of wood from two arms long and three fingers wide, which has the head at right angles to the end, in order for it to fit perfectly under the body, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	and then place it on top of the head with a long cloth, so that the patient is not injured, and then remove it from the patient's head;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend your arms above the post, and place the shoulder on the post, and the arm at the top of the patient's head, then put the arm on a beam of a beam that is wide, and let it be extended down, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint has now been realigned.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is ready in any way, so that you put an equal wool thread on the axle, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and aloes of the egg, all over the shoulder and back, then remove the axle gradually, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let it rest thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he stretch a little, until the members are comfortable, because he will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then stretch more after 5 or 7 days, and move him;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if he is firm and has not become softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or any other cause, so that you make three piercings in it, as it is placed before or with the plaster of the piercings.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and he relaxes after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot raise his arms upstream, then you know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or weakened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and knows that the joint never was set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	the dislocation which is above the hip, and the breasts, or behind, so is made by impact, and stretching of hands, and I administer another place;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat as long as it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the recovery comes grit to the member, and late movement, then the patient uses it many times, until that grit is healed, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Knows that the joint at the neck is dislocated and returns to its place;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and has dislocated from all sides, and most of all in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned to its place, for it can be seen well and felt well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the ill shoulder with the sound one, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is decayed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way as the legs come together, for if the legs come together, it would be painful to bring them back, if they were brought back;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and may not be reset from all sides, most of all when it is behind;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is worse than other dislocations, and causes great pain, and sometimes it leads to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such that, when it is like this, so that you can bring it back, you extend its hand with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And its arms spread out, and the hands face each other at the elbow joint from behind and in front, and push the joint into its socket, or at the root of the palm, until it regains its place;
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if he is dislocated in front, so he returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and proud of the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and two ministers extend the arm, and turn it two ministers, so that he does not move at the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	Then turn the arm of each side, then you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when you see the joint of the hand, if it is not oiled to soften the joint, then push the joint together, until it regains its place;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, put on plaster dry with ointment of sheep fat, and strain it, and hold the arm at the shoulder of the sick person, and leave it for a few days, then remove it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	and if the joint is stable in its place, then release the splint, and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint is not well set, then begin again with plaster and the splint, and leave it in this way for a few days, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	and if he feels pain after reducing the joint, and it moves, then bathe and gently massage it, and press until it is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or put on the joint a lamb's wool grease, then leave it for a day and a night, then the bone, and let it enter or bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sues, he rubs the joint well, then puts the young on top, and then goes in or bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and so does it twice or three times until it is healthy;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you want to see, put it at the end of a wet cooked bread and strain it out;
si revenra a sa disposition.	then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand is dislocated, and recovery is lighter than that of other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	However, it must be returned to its place carefully when it is dislocated, in the middle of the movement so that the bones do not hurt or come out with a hot poultice.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the way to do this is to put the bad hand on a table, and spread the fingers out wide, and look at them so that you make them all even, then put your palm on the appearance of the joint, and press it down until it comes back to life.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	However, it is necessary that you look to see if he is well placed.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Then put the patient's back hand on a table for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's palm down on the table and spread out their fingers.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	But if not, take the patient's arm and hold it so that the elbow joint faces upwards, and let it rest in this position while we continue.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put him back in place after several days, then the joint will be twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	And do not let the patient use his hands until his fingers are no longer swollen and he is able to grip things firmly again:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	Then know that the nerve is cut, or an artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other way to extract it but by means of a delicate cautery tool, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put it on the pus as we have said, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then take it off and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he can't move it well, and there is no fracture, if the hot water makes it moist, and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No time do you dislocate the two fingers at each end, no time at the back of the palm or belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then put the two together and hold them close to the joints until they come back into place, then support the head of the two with your hand and turn it towards the part where they are joined;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it in that position for a day, and then make it even;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not tie it up as we have said, and untie it by day, and let it move, and then tie it back up;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, as long as it is tight, and in the same way if it has been dislocated at the bottom of the palm, and do so as you have done before until it is well;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and in the same way when it has been dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand are not displaced at each end, nor on the back of the palm or belly; then they are bent, and shift the dislocation to the pouche until it returns
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or collarbone is dislocated, or multiple dislocations occur, there will be no cure unless it is quickly treated, for death comes swiftly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the excretions jump forth without will, nor can they be contained, and many times some member is softened, or both feet or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And many times the skin changes color in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	who changes color behind is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the cure is that you reward it if the gilling has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there is no cure or recovery from all this.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling, or from blows, or from similar things, the ancient ways of curing with big words, or it does not at all bring great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have simplified it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gilling which comes from the back before, there is no beginning nor healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and I say that comes straight down the two sides, and can not be cured anyone but who properly comes at the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	is that the patient is lying on his face in an even position, and has a poultice applied to him so that he does not blister;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put a hot tong to the head on the ground shaped, and another one under the chest, and tie a bandage around the patient's body above the malady, and another one under the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and the two know the ropes, one to the head and the other to the chest between the two tongs;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are firmly tied, the rope as we have said, and the mirrour places its hands on the spine shaped, until it revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this cure, then take a tumbler of three long arms, and cover the wall with it, and put the patient on one side, and pour the water from the tumbler over the spine covered with the wall, then place the middle of the tumbler on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and set the mirrore upon the other head of the table, and press it well, until it comes back to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do this with your hand that twists.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And so that you set the two torches on the head of the sick person with a long pole, and between each torch, opposite and aside, a palm's width of space;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and in each torch put a peg where the twist comes, and let the torch be firmly rooted in the ground so that it does not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two torches put one torch turning, so that the line turns, and set two small torches of a palm' width long, to turn the twist;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then let the line be laid that is among the torches to the twist opposite the head, and the other line toward the torches, and each minister twist his own line, and the master put the pegs at equal intervals as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on dried plaster with much honey, and then the patches, and then the wood from a tablet of three inches long, which turns red when it comes into contact with the gangrene and the part of the spine that is healthy, and tie it with a thread, as we have said, and use subtle fasting for the patient until he is well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if nothing comes in the end of the health, then administer softening and soothing medicines with the wood that we have said above.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and never give a piece of plaster, and never does the appearance come in the lower spine at the back, and be careful that it is not dislocations;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	This is the bone that opens, for one should not have any presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	for fear that death might come.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip joint
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	It is known that the hips and shoulder joints only come from dislocations, not at all like the other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	behind and in front;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more behind them, and less dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations behind is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is farther away, and the sick knees are higher than the healthy ones, and the sick man cannot double his knee in fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the legs that are swollen with heat from an abscess, so that the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that which comes outside is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who is in front are that his leg is straight according to the fittingness;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	all the way, don't double up on the knee pain, and if you let it walk, you can't do it before, and hold back your urine, and swell the ankle, and when you go, you go over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who has been behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and is this leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hipbone is in its place among the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	Those who come to this dislocation appearance should know that if the dislocation is old, and it delays according to its disposition, there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it doesn't make sense for him to have presumptuousness.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in those who have a fresh dislocation, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to restore the joint, and turn it inside out and outside in, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	So that it may return, and there is no need for any other treatment;
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	If it doesn't return in this way, you must prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg very strongly with both hands, or tie it where it is tied to the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and other ministers extend their hand above in a certain way that he bottle his hands of his asses, then he strangles with a string on the cunt;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and other tings take the hair from the loins;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards all at once, so that the patient is raised up from the ground all at once, and remains there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	And this way of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then one should put a cure to his appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocations are in the back, you must lie the patient on his back, then put the string on the root of the cunt, and the line that is out of its place, then extend the line upwards towards the anus, and downwards towards the root.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	Then other ministers take his arms, and embrace the big line of the cunt of the patient, and extend it to both sides in a certain form:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	If he returns to his place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have described, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope from the heel, and on the thigh, and extend the sore leg twice as far as the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then hang it by the neck of a post, and be hung from the ground two long arms;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	and order one minister to embrace the head of the patient, and have other ministers hang with him who embrace the hips in a way that the joints return quickly;
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is away, so the patient lies down as we have described in the one who has giddy-head, and remove the rope from the leg properly, and also on the waist;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two sticks, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick a stick between the legs of the sick person so that it fits into the form;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and let hang damp towels inside, so that it does not burn the sick person, then extend each minister towards him, and let him put the dislocation in his hand at an equal distance from his body.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, set on .ie. a table, and press it thus as we said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocations are in front, if it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and let him put his pain on the sick leg, then press with the other hand, and extend it towards the knee;
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocations are at the back, if it is not necessary to extend the sick person backwards, do not lift him up from the ground, but rather let him fall backwards as he was lying; so that he falls on his two hind legs, as we have said when lying down on the two legs;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and over his face, and the leg extended as we have said above, and must all be pressed together on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and will be at a point when the patient extends his legs, and they shall be even;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then fix the knees, and put on the plaster, and extract a bandage, so that the ankle does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and rest for three or four days, then remove it, and put on the plaster;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are even, then extract it, as before, and leave it for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then remove it, and let him walk loudly, until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	from the dislocation of the hip joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The genius is dislocated according to three manners:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inside and outside, and behind.
et ne desalue point devant.	and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his crotch, and if it does not bend to his crotch, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the reduction of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee between your palms, and draw back between your two, then bend the two ribs of the knee together;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and other ministers extend his foot, until the genoux returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg to his crotch lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and put the plaster on, and make the leg bend at the crotch, and keep it together firmly for three or four days, then remove it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not work on the patient's pain, as long as the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the members are not at their place, if one administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, nor completely displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	and the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and try before the part where it has been displaced:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	let them stretch lightly if they are light, and they must extend lightly with their hands when they are slightly bruised.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And if it is displaced from the top, you must make the patient sit upright, and tie him down except for the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then train the foot with your right hand, and then with your left hand twice, and then raise it up, and blow on the foot well up;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice, as we have said, blowing and training the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it comes back, it is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then begin again, because it returns;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot come back in this way, then take the sick person on their back on the ground, and place a hard pass firmly in the ground between their legs, and tie the drapes around, so that he does not hurt the sick.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then wrap the minister's hip, and another minister extends the leg to its hands or ties it, so that he lies on the neck of the stone;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and the pass should be close between the sick person's hips to hold the sick person down;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the mirror of dislocation in the minister's hands, and another minister ties the healthy leg to the side, and the dislocation will come back slowly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is set, then apply the plaster and press it down, and strain it well, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard against the joints that are on the back of the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	and leave it II days or III, and bind it loose, if he draws.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	and release it on the third day or fourth, and protect the patient from going out for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses come to a head, so that you calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is well.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so that they are nicely extended without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any joint of his back or foot, then you must make the patient sit upright on a flat bed or chair, and put your foot on that which opens these joints, then press your foot firmly, until he regains feeling;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is healed, and does not open anymore, then place the sole of his foot on a table at four corners, then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then release him;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is restored, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in this art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to anger, do not be too hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and at the beginning of things use soothing ointment on an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, now set the limb back in place so that the abscesses may come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer soothing ointment to the wound and treat it with dry poultices as appropriate;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there has been a fracture with joint displacement and some small bones have broken, then do as we said for simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and keep yourself from going down the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will bring you into difficulty according to your Creator, and for the sake of saving your life and your body.
