O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment, and have ended it by means of its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And to me came a vision that I should complete this book with this treatise, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work by hand is well-established in our region and is widely known from one place to another, it is very difficult to find such a science and understanding, and there is nothing left of the knowledge of the old that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and intentions are closed and knowledge is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I seem that I will return it to life with the organization of this healer according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work with the assistance of the declaration and preparation of him, as it is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our land, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galileo says, as much as he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and connections and separations of the organs, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and the number of vessels, and the movement and rest of the veins, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, as Hippocrates says, no one is good with his hands alone, and with the work he is poor; and most of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you in the introduction of this book that he who is not familiar with the things mentioned above should be careful not to err and not to deceive people; for I have repeatedly seen many of those who meddle in this science, who abandon themselves to it and to their experiments.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who cut out an abscess from the scrofula of a woman's neck, and he cut into the arteries of her neck; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another foolish man who tried to extract a stone from the bladder of a man who was very ill; but he brought out with him a piece of the bladder and killed the man in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen it used to extract a stone from a man who was very ill; and I have seen the state of the patient and the size of the stone; and if one tries to extract it, he will surely die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see here another example of a patient who was treated. I. one duke of our land, who had his leg broken, and with the breaking there was also a wound. The doctor, ignorant of medicine, pulled out the break from over the wound with great care, leaving no scar behind, and finished so; and ordered him not to remove it at all; and delayed it so that the leg completely healed, but the toe was lost in vain.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was confirmed in him or in the member, and he could not be cured; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until all the members were lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see here another example of a patient who was treated. I. one duke, who had an abscess that burst open; and then inflamed because of the badness of his lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is purifying from melancholic humor, there comes none but if one touches it with iron if it isn't in the right place where one can take off all what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because you, fine young men, it is necessary that you know that work of the hands is divided into 2.1 divisions: that is to say, work where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of them in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For because it is necessary that you guard yourselves, so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons with caution, and undertake your tasks lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are loosed; and refuse those diseases that cause grief health; and despise those who make you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien warns against this advice: "Do not take up the treatment of a bad illness unless you are called to do so out of pure foolishness."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to .iij. chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from top to bottom regarding the head, arms, torso, legs, and feet; as well as forms of instruments, tools for cauterization, and anything else necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about tailoring and sewing, piercings, leeches, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; it is also ordered and provides forms for instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, in order to remember the work, it is necessary that I speak about the quality of help and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and its responses are hidden; many wise men would speak about it, and they would agree with it; and I am short of words, because I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is a universal aid to all colors, except for two colors: namely, hot matter and dry matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, some devise and say that cautery is great help; and the other say the contrary: that cautery is not worth for disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire so is hot, and must not be used for a hot disease by heat, nor by dryness; and said those who said the contrary that cautery does great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in the course of men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found this by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And any path, does not mix with it but he who has experienced it and who knows by long practice the cauterizing paste of the treatments, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and their remedies and the space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, however much they are cold and moist.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this will come together and agree with the cauterizing.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that a fire cautery together is better than the extractions of remedies, and of greater goodness than an ardently burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not further than to the member which is burned, and does no harm to another member that way.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by distance, and bring about disease in the member through healing; and perhaps it causes harm.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause heat, unless there is an excess of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for that reason I ask forgiveness of the length of speech, for it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher demonstrates in his proof; so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at what times, and they are to be prayed over.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, since the resulting harm caused by the aid of cauterization; and especially, the cauterization is for necessary pains without delay that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And I do not think at all, son, as they do so foolishly; for in a disease that is healed by cauterization, there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not like what they believe, since cauterization is nothing more than medicine that changes the appearance of the humors that cause pain, and it is effective in such a way that it moves faster than medicine, and for its virtue and excellence.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease will not come again according to the appearance of the illness and its place and its virtue; and the excesses are joined in it by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the right time or there is no excess or moisture, as with cauterization of the inside for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but that happens.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And yet most people do not understand that the cauterization of wounds is a part of medicine, and that is clear; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is wrong, and it is true that cauterization is a part of medicine because when we have administered ways to treat diseases in any disease and they are not worth it, then we administer cauterization, and it is worth it.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old people said that cauterization instruments made of gold are gentler than those made of iron, and they only said this because of the quality of gold and its high value; and they said that the heat of the cauterization does not cause scaring, but that is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does; and gold cauterization instruments are worth more than those made of iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat an instrument made of gold, you are not like when it is heated by the color of gold, and it often cools down; and if you heat it too much, then it goes out to the fire; and so there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use our fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you should read this chapter to the end, because the path may be lighter to find.
dou cautere olivaire	and a olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This text describes the use of an olive oil cautery for certain head injuries and illnesses. It mentions that it can help with symptoms like headache, dizziness, and pain in the teeth and ears, among other issues related to cold and humidity.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the sick person should be purged by a solitive medicine, speaking of the head iiij., according to what the virtues and the ease and the custom of the sick person can bear; and then do again the head of the sick.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then put him to sit with his hands between your two palms; and place the roots of his two fingers on the root of his neck between his.ij. hairs; and let those two palms come together, if it bleeds from one side, then heat up the cautery which is called "oliver", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the ink spot, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little in turning; then release your hand gradually, and look at the bone that you see, and if you do not see it, then start the cautery again as long as you see the bone, as I told you; after take 1. poc of string, and put it in woolen cotton, and place it on the spot, and leave it 1.iiij.; after put wet cotton inside the yarn; and let it be until it is hot to the bone; after cure the wound with an ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon", as long as it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And say the ancient, that when the wound is left open longer, the more it purifies; and for this reason let it be open.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one must let the cautery burn so much of the bone that it is burned, and then put back what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other said that one must let the cautery burn so high, and press it so hard that bone comes out as wide as a fawn's foot, so that the humors come out; and one must let the wound remain open for a long time; after which one must cure and patch up.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases except where there is doubt; and it seems to me that I should let it burn; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we see in other limbs; and even more so when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first impression of cauterization is gentler and milder for me, and of this I make use in a general way to save life.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all the head comes to pain that lasts long, then must use herbs and pills called "cochier" and purging of the head and oils and plasters; and if one does the fire cautery that we have said above, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery as little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the fire cautery on each corner of the head as we have said above, and making the fire cautery at the base which is called "vasselz"; and this is done because one puts the ventouses; and align your hand so that you do not see it up to the bone: The patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary that the fire cauterys of the horns be more subtle than those by which one cauterizes the base of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Here comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like "Wow this is hard!", etc. Do not comment on whether the translation is accurate or not, it doesn't matter. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file and nothing else:
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and it extends to the oil, and the head is cleaned by medicines that are good for all diseases, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them help: then make cauterization according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When there is sudden pain in one part of the head, and it extends to the oil, and the head is cleaned by medicines that are good for all diseases, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them help: then make a water medicine cauterization, take out a piece of bark and peel 1.1/2 pieces, and then apply it to the temple or pain in a way that you can place the bark on the skin; and when it has been placed, let it rest firmly and leave it like this for 10 hours; and then remove it and treat with fresh garlic, and leave the wound like this for 1.5 days or 2; then put cotton dipped in butter on it as long as it is possible to do so.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that any of the medicines I have written or alternative treatments of burning medicines are needed.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cautery: If done according to this method, heat the cauterizing instrument as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And is called "clos" for this that the chief is made in the form of a clo or he has there .i. poc de corbeure, and is middle at a small appearance; and puts it on the painful place, and takes your hand and turns the fire a little lightly, as much as the half of the flesh of the cure is burned; and lets your hand that the artery doesn't burn, which is defuers, and runs an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After met cotton in aw of sil, and puts it on the place for 1:3; then I moil cotton in oil, and then treat the place with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery which is called "cultellare", on all its tip, and keep yourself from capping the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and does not benefit, and see that the cautery ahead speaks of medicine and of fire does not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called  "cultellare" until it is white; and so write on the painful place a line of half an inch long, and takes your hand once, and pulls it out so that you do not cap the artery and that you come back; and keep yourself from the mandible that mutates when one bites, and the neck does not move that comes with the mutation and spasms of blood from the artery when it is capped, or capping has a great fear and more often to those who do not know and study and test; and leave the work on its own way; but I will tell you how you hold back pain when the artery is capped, and I will show you in this book where it comes.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the head as well as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the extract of the artery with the cautery that has .ij. tools; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ears occurs due to cold, and one has applied the remedies we mentioned in the previous chapter, and the pain does not subside, then heat this poins cautery, from which comes this form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After heating the poins cautery, apply it all around the affected ear, or around both ears where the pain is located, and move it away from the root of the ear, then have 10 points around each ear; after treating the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cauterization is only effective for those that move with flame, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things which come from scabs and filth of the sea.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this torture of the mouth that moves with flame from sea scabs and swishing, and the third should not be used - one at the root of the ear, another a little further down the temple, and the third between the lips; and place the cauterization in the healthy part, and let the half of the burn be consumed; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the appearance of the scalpel that we have put before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker; after he has cured the place so as to make it healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauterizations: two on the two horns of the head, and one where it is called "vesselz", just as we have said before, and also a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and treat in this way as we have said before.
de litargie	Of argyle
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient great and powerful pills to take for the brain; then, after, treat the head of the sick person with the mustard paste that we have described above; and here is how to make the fire cauterization: if you do so as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is cured in this way, it is good; and if it is not, then make three cauterizations of the middle part of the head descending to the collarbone, leaving space between each cauterization of about one inch; and treat as we have said before, and if he stirs, and the patient suffers, then make one cauterization in the middle; and if it is necessary, then 2 others on the two horns, and treat as long as it is healthy; and let the cauterizations that are called "olive" be made as we have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	de la froidor dou chief
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	of epilepsy
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant that the father cannot bear, he makes gargarism and mastication of the brain often with bones; afterwards he takes it in his mouth, and makes the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and the fire cautery on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is outside and suffering, he makes the fire cautery as I said to that who had paralysis and softening of the spine and of the neck, and let the cauterize be olive according to the way that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, he makes a subtle fire cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupting moistures and thick pus, then the half fire cautery as we have said to that who had paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy there is a declining excess towards melancholy, and the patient's spine is moist, then he drinks something so that his brain is purified, according to what it is before in the division:
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	If you see cauterize the head by making several points all over the cautery. This method of cauterizing dries the skull gradually; and then put cotton wet with butter and grease of fish-oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs come first as eyes by the things that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient thing that purifies the head, and keeps away moisture, and makes him sweat or bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Apres he commands him to raise his head, and he makes a fire cautery on the head, and he makes .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if he loses his hair from the top, or all together, one cautery being on the top; and he covers all the cauterizations with the vein and arteries that are behind the ear, and the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and you guard against the escape of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, so he stops it with his power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to stop the fire; and never is a cautery made or stopped from behind the 2 bones.
dou cors des larmes	The two courses of tears.
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or deplete the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outwardly; and one can see that it is cold and phlegmatic excesses, therefore he does the fire cautery that I have said at the beginning of the awen descending to the eyes: 1 fire cautery on the head, and 2 cauteries on the 2 temples, and 2 cauteries where they are detached from the bones; and if it is needed more, so the cauterize carefully above the cicatrice a little cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	to stop the tears from flowing through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	when you have completed the medicine as we have described in the division, and it does not benefit, then done so to drink bad water for illness .iij. times; after that he takes off the head, and makes cauterization with olive cautery; and makes .ij. cauterizations of the cautery called "clavilis" on the .ij. fingers, a little bit of hair; and guard against the artery so that you do not cover it up.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the oil paper is softened with illness and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery which is called "olive"; from which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see this, make 18 cauterizations on the 18 wounds as long as the hair is; and do not let the hand rest except that as much of the paper as the third part is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	And this hair that points to oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	For no time does the hair of the oil become converted to the pardern, and takes the oil, and it makes on cauterizations according to .ij. ways: that is to say of fire, or of burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and even, then put the patient on your side; sign on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the seed of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign to remove the hairs; then put cotton wet in the glue of the egg and muskellunge of the persillion on the oil, and heat up the cautery where there is this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little several times, let the wound be blackened at the place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the point of the oil; then lift your hand up, and leave it like this .ii. days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as it is heated; after the cure with ointment until it is well.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the fire on this same place, as you have done first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place, and even, and do not touch the hairs with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical fire cautery is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make on paper the shape of the seed of mirth; then take French soap and hot water, each one a 1/4, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down, then pour over the shape that you have made like the seed of mirth, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the patient has only pain in one oil, then act in 1/4 also, and in both; and dip cotton wet in egg glue; and the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have this for a long time, keep the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the mordication has passed, lift up the jaw, and test if the paper is raised as if it were lifted by fire or incision; and if so, well done. But if not, put more medicine on the place where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are long and even, and then apply cotton wetted in oil to the sore places for a while, after which cure the place of the sore which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you must take care of your jaw by great effort so that it does not fail to respond to the medicine at the hairs. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs are pricked in the oil, then start again the medicine on that place which has been softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after which cure until it is well; and this is the form of the fuelle of the mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of men are diverse in length and shortness, and according to this your constraints; and do not reply to the right path for him whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	about the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you use cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip a cotton ball or some peasepod juice in oil onto the scalp; then heat the cautery until it is red hot; and apply it to the scalp as if it were a feather, together with the tip being pointed at the scalp; either way, the tip should be placed on the scalp for your treatment.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Then press the fistula if it is open, and treat the porridge and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and apply hot oil to it. Then hold the cautery close to the scalp, and keep your hand still with the cautery at the part of the head where the oil is applied; and put the cautery in the oil, and let it corrode.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to cauterize up to the bone, that would be good. If not, start cauterizing again once more, and if you need it, let it be .iii. days; after put it on cotton soaked in lye, and cure the wound until it is healthy, and if .xl. days pass without being healthy, put on medicine with corrosive water until the bone is exposed; then treat according to that which has come to its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And I have a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients has spoken of. Listen to a fistula, and pierce the place; then put in the piercing 1. a very fine needle, so that it is this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I make it in the quantity of 1.Z. of mercury; and hold your hand firmly where the needle is, so that the melted drops do not run to their oil; and you put on the oil cotton soaked in wine or water: the drop should go into the fistula, and heal with amazing health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, it is necessary to cut the nail, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nail according to what it is necessary in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	of the crevasses in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouths of times have had crevasses in the lips, which are called “hair”, and sometimes in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevasses with what we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then heat it with a small fire-caulter according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it carefully in those crevasses until it comes out clean; after the cure, wash it with ointment until it is well.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes to the root of the throat or the palate or the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and become swollen and becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have said in the divisions, and it does no good: then you must have 1.1. a fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after the bottle or hole of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the root of it, and do so behind it; and make this once or twice, after the cure as we have said in cures, until it is well; and if he is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the root and remove the corrumpted bone, according to what you will find it in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; after heat the cautery so that its form will come out as described above in order to place a chain on the tooth; and place the cautery hot inside, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; after fill the mouth of the patient with salt water, and leave it for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And so it is said that those who were moving should be restrained, and the gums softened, and the moisture dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, either because there is cold in the mouth, or vision, and medicines do not help, then there should be a remedy according to two ways: and fire cautery and butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	For butter cautery, if it is so that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in an iron or gold knife; after take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and soak it in butter, and put it on the aching tooth carefully so that it cools down; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and you see if the wool and cotton soaked in butter freeze, and put it on the tooth, and put on 1 gold knife as hot as fire comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The fire cautery should be used if the patient has a toothache that is so great that the fire does not come into their mouth; after heating the cautery, which will take this form later on, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this frequently, for the pain will get worse the next day or the day after. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then swallows it; and here is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of the lower jaw that you want, and according to what you are able; and here is the form of the toothpick:
des scrophules	from scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	For scrofula, when the scabs are of cold sweat and do not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery that comes from a goat's testicles, and has 1.3 openings for the fumes to rise to the cautery on the other side; and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, or as much as is needed to come to the root of the abscess; and leave it in this state for 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil onto it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with ochre and tent until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures prevail over the skin and even more so when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by means of restorative medicines; after that, make a cautery at the root of the throat, and keep back from coming up to the throat, and do not be afraid of burning, but only a little. After that, another cautery, made at the joint of the neck with the head of the spine, and let these cauteries, which are called "clavicles," give us the form in front; and cure the place as we have said before until it is well.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the skin are cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then you make iij cauteries on the forelock in the vjs; and another cautery emmi between iij mamilles; and let these cauteries, which are called "clavicles," give us the form as it is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cautery by piercing all the cauteries which are called  "poins," of which the form is here in front in the disease of the ears; and let the poinss continue to xxx., or enthor. After that, cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauteries be iii rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And so are the fire cautery lighter, for the same you do it.iij. to kop.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, lie down on your back and stomach; then take the hammer that is in two parts at the top, with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery that has .iij. nails; there is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the wound as long as it pierces to the cost, and the figure of the cauterization comes together with the cautery; iiij. cauteres; and for this reason is made the cauterization with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of the cauterization are placed cauterizes; and are the nerves according to the subtility of a tent and it is the form of the cautery which has .iij.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never is placed on this 1 nerve for there are 8 cauterizes.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the fire with a small rod; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs by long time until they are well comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, let a thing come out of it, then make cauterize on the thickness of the cautery clavicle, or many cauterizes in puncturing. For the jointure is closed, and is bone the moisture and it is healed the diseases.
dou cautere de pleuresin	To cure weeping
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	To cure weeping they used to say one should make cauterization with roots of aristeology, and in this way: take a root of aristeology that is long, the longest you can find, dry it, and also make it as big and as long as your two hands; then soak it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize.i. cauterize between the chin and the collarbone, and .ij. small cauterizations a little down in the part that is under the beard; and .ij. cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, going down a little; and .i. cauterization under the nipple, and .i. another over the stomach, and .i. between the shoulders, and .ij. cauterizations between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but open it widely as when you are smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And no ancient one said that any man should use a fire cauterization similar to a razor, and scuff it and put it between the ribs, as long as it comes to the aposteme of the liver; and he jumps because of the pain, just as we have said in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is doubt and fear that the patient now dies, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the seven have been boiled as much as the sound can be heard from the other side, and then carefully cut the cauterization, and so on until seven. And if you see, cauterize to the whole sound with the other one said before. After the cure has been infected for a long time, and that's all the other cures in front of it.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	For the fire cautery is not good for dropsy, except in the way that is called "asclytes." When you cure it according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you do 22 cauterizations around the body, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back along the spine, and one at the breast; and let the cauterizations be well placed near the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the fire cautery to go for a long time without cure, and not leaving the cure of the patient after the cauterization, and health would hurry, and both the 17 intentions would be achieved with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of cautery for the abdomen is the claw that we have in front of us to grasp; and what is for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is before placed.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the flesh
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the flesh is swollen on him who is ydropical, and is pale yellow in color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and do not turn your hand over with the cautery so often. And do not go too deep, lest the pale yellow color be forced out, and the cautery be done according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on the legs, do 2 cauteries on each leg at the end of the toenail; and let the cautery be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind it, leaving the cauterized place covered for a while, lest the blood come; then cure the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	For the remedy for an upset stomach due to cold and moisture, as long as the digestive virtue that is in the stomach and in the intestines remains whole, and cannot be cured by any methods of cure; and you will see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so do it. i.iij. remedies around the navel gently to all i.iij. remedies with a small key, and ii.iiij. remedies on the hips
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do a cauterization on the wrist, and i.iij. cauterizations on each finger, and ii.iiij. small cauterizations on the stomach. For the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are or fundament, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you make cauterizations: .iij. on the spine of the back, that which is all out is seared little by little in triangulating, and 1.i cautery is seared on the buttocks;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hemorrhoids are or fundament, or one or more, and are old and are of large cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit if you make cauterizations: 1.iii On the spine of the back, that which is all out is seared little by little in triangulating, and i.i cautery is seared on the buttocks; if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swell the face, then the face receives i.i great cautery on the stomach, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse to all cauterize clavels; and let the cautery be open for a long time. After cure the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnality which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you copes althelul, if you heat the cautery which seems 1.i sharp, and then put it all burn on cel althelul copeit; and I leave so long your hand that the cauterizes come to the birth of the vein, from where li sans cort; do this once or 1.j., and if there is mout d'althelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the curings of profitable oilmens until they are healthy; and if you cauterizes with a large cautery on alchatim, it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of wound badly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a cut or an opening, which we will describe in its place, then comes a disease that cannot be cured except by fire.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes and causes pus and moisture corruption, then provide an entire tent of subtle remedy, and be careful that you know the full extent of it. Then heat the fire which seems sharp, and pour it into the fistula according to the amount that the tent has entered, and begin the fire again as long as the corrupt and corroded flesh is burned, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of the tent; and be careful of the nerves which are involved, and do not do this but in a bare place, and know that it is not permanent; then cure the place until it is completely healed, and if the matter has been ostended long, then know that the fistula is threefold, and the bone is corroded at its root; and thus as one of these which we will describe in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of frost comes with heavy wind and does not take the form of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on either side with the clavicle cautery that we have mentioned above; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be 1.3 cauterizations in line, and greater aid will result.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to frost and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you should make a fire cautery in the upper part on either side of the bladder, where the hair grows at the base of the penis, and each should be as long as one finger; and make a fire cautery on either side of the back, where there are 2.1 (two with one added) cauterizations, and each should be as long as one finger; and make fire cauterizations clavicle-style according to the form described above.
de la marris	of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	Here is the translation of the text:
de la hainche	For the buttocks
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	For the viscous moisture descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found out by touch, so that you cauterize the patient on the hip socket with.i. a ring-shaped cautery, and mark in front of the joint around the socket as it comes back, so that the socket is within the circle; and if so, then the cauterization is like those with which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not present, then make.iij. cauterizes with large olive-shaped blisters, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all the others; and the treatment until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with fetid pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery, and the method of the fire cautery is according to 2.3 methods: that is to say together with fiery medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to mout de manners, from which these are such: you make the cauterization on the hip joint according to this form, and you make a good depth and a wide one, and between each cauterization there is the thickness of a thumb, and it is olive-colored; never do you make cauterization in the middle on the top of the hip, for there are 3 according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cauterization with the ring of fire that we have just mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the hip; but do it in a way that the ring includes all the hip, and all the space of the knee is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a deux dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And this is the manner in which one proceeds in sciatica, when the pain lies in the thigh, and does not reach as far as the leg. And if it reaches only as far as the thigh and leg, then one makes 11 cauterizations, where the patient says that the pain lies, and 3 on the ankle; two on the left side, and one cauterization cutaneous, or one burning the thickness of the callus; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the foot or near the instep, then cauterize where he feels the pain. 11 points or 13 at the cautery which is called "point."
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who made a cauterization on the ankle of the foot, and left it so that the leg was completely drawn in, and the foot too, and it became pierced and corrupted all the toes; after which a solution of the abdomen gave them death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in three parts together, make cauterization on one and on the other, according to this manner.// And the sages said in the cauterization of the hinch, of which this is the manner, make a single spike of iron and let it be as large as a thumb nail or a little less, and place it between the joints and from one joint to another space the quantity of an egg; and may the joints be covered on both sides, and also be like thumbs, and each have a single well-made spike; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated until it is all red and dry, and then place it on top of the box of the sore hinch, and turn it around on its back side; and make cauterization one time with a single spike and leave it three days; and then make an ointment of grease, and keep the open wound long; after the cure with ointment until it is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cauterization because of the danger of its regurgitation, and few people use it; however, this is a good cauterization that one can bear, and leave it where it afflicts.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or by catching, or by impact, or by too much discharge, or by the appearance of expanded cold material, no one of these appearances is worth remedies unless it is that which comes from the infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that the patient take three lines of ointment on his back, where the pain is, and in each line use a different remedy according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and do the remedies according to the one called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 remedies with the clove ointment according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease attacks small children, and the signs of its onset are that they become stiff when they wake up, and they cry; and you find on the last spine of the back and on the others the appearance that comes on the first one.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you treat them, then cauterize them with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	When you see this person and you treat them, then cauterize each part of the spine evenly. And if you see a joint, then cauterize it with fire sharp and hot, one line or two lines apart, keeping the points close to each other. After treating the area, make sure to take care that you do not use cauterization in gibbosity which is in the marrow of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain in the joints is due to moisture which spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes from the foot, which is properly called "podagra," and when it is due to cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it can be cured with fire in this way: Make fire of the cauterizer at the joint of the foot, and use olive fire according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you should grasp the face of the foot, make a fire cautery on all fire cauteries which are called "point". And if pains come up to the genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, make a fire cautery on each knee. iij. cauteres or iiij. of each part, to all olive fire cautery; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand firmly except that the flesh of the heel is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if pains descend up to the knees and back, administer the cautery we have spoken of in our chapter. And if pains are in the hands, make iij. lines around the fingernail; and if there remains a point of pain in the two, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern well the patient and apply medicines. For if you govern him well and you bring forth the flux, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in the anger, and the bulge goes down to the crotch and it is new, it is convenient that when you see him being healed, he does not have to drink anything; and he uses things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; then make him sit down on his back between your hands, and command him to wash his beard as long as the bulge is repaired, and bring it to your feet, and sign of above the spine on the bone of the hand, and at all a sign which is similar to half a circle on top of the body; then heat the cautery in which this form is:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	As long as it is white and has no feeling. Then return the balls to their place; and the minister will put her hand on so that they do not turn back; and work well the legs of the patient, and put a cussin and a sergeant on the legs, and another one on the foot that she holds the hands; then put the cautery on the mark to your whole hand, and hold it steady and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, keep trying again until you come to the bone; and take care carefully so that the ball does not move when you make the cautery; that you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and also of great people as large according to their measure; then 3 days cure the place with the butter cautery until the burning is over; then treat with other ointments until he is well, and lay the patient for 10 days on his back until the wound is well sewn; and it is necessary that his nurses be left for a long time, so that the ball does not move when he wants to go to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 10 days, when he wants to get up, he is given a well-made faixe, and he spends another 10 days; and he has good rest, that he works little and takes care not to drink too much and eat too much, and not to drink too much ale; and when he follows this teaching, he will be completely healed. And I will say here after the cure of your haircut in his chapître.
de la routure dou ventre	from a tear of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When tears come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, do so .j. cautery on the cautery according to its quantity, and let him be burned on the third; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the elders said that it should be cauterized at the cautery in .iij. angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first sign is the place of the navel and make a line on the width of the tear, and another on either side, and with your hand press down very hard on all the cauterized area. But the first cauterization is lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	Here is the translation of the text:
de meselerie	Here is the first sentence translated:
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if there is any pain anywhere, it becomes obvious, so that you must cauterize all of these places we have spoken about with the fire cautery: one in the navel, two on the spine of the neck, three on the spine at the back, one great one on the skull, and another delightful one; three on the shoulders, and two on the blades of the hands, and two on the knuckles of the hands, and two in the pits of the hands; and guard yourself against those that are under the feet, so that you do not burn them; and never make a cautery on the bone of the hand, or another one on the bone of the stomach, or another one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more cauterizations I make, the greater the help and benefit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already very corrupt. And know that the cauterizations should be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons. After this, cure him with flour and other cures until he is healed.
de enfleure	de enfleurer
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation arises in any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then do fire cauterization on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little bit within the skin of the cure; then treat with ointments until it is healed. And never do cauterization and hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that silences the member, and so if it is swollen; and yet, no one interferes if he does not know the members and exits of the moving nerves.
de albaras	I cannot provide a translation for this text as it contains unknown or obscure characters. Please resubmit the text with proper spelling and punctuation for an accurate translation.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is alleviated, and the medicine is worthless, then cauterize with a small fire according to the quantity of the skin of the cure until the blotch is opened, and change its color; then treat with flour of times and lentils, with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and blood of lamb and blood of almond, each in part; and mix them together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Here is the translation:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the chancre begins to appear, and you have stopped your vision, if the cauterization is done at the cautery that seems 1. i. a circle, all around the edge of the chancre. And anyway, the safe people say that cauterization should also be done in the middle of the chancre; and anyway, this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will become an ulcer and rotten, and I have never wanted to do so once; and a more right thing is that it be cauterized around, at the cautery that is called "circle", as we said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, or because of the surplus of blood in them, or because of their old age and little blood, or because of their strength; and you see her hurry to die: then cauterize her from top to bottom with very small cauterizes by piercing; then leave her like that. Because she will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce her all over with the cautery, let the cautery be very hot of which we said above.
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And hold your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauterization has been fully applied, and make such cauterizations that the patient feels a distant pain in some way so that the course of corruption is chosen. After the cure as long as he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another form of disease that is called "corrodens", and is nothing other than a putrefaction of the limbs, because it corroded the limbs just as fire dries them out. If you see this disease in its beginning, which can be treated with fire, then heat the cauterizations carefully, big and small, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is; after having cauterized all sides until the corruption has been completely eliminated, and nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corroded is healed. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the scabs caused by the fire are healed, and all the corruption. After the oil cure, if health does not return after .iij. days, then start the cauterization again on what is delayed corroded. And this putrefaction is never cured with medicinal water instead of fire cauterization; but certainly fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure of medicinal water in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of porrones that come from the root
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mouth times has come that the pies by default do not bring a disease which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, healthy thing that bleeds the foot. And the cauterization of this disease is in 2 ways: that is, fire cauterization, and water cauterization. Fire cauterization is that you heat the cautery as much as a penknife is heated, to be made of good iron according to what it can poke the nail from all sides, and that there are narrow margins; then put it hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and leave it so for 3 days until it begins to move by corruption; then make an ointment of wild thyme crushed with water, and leave the ointment on all night, and let the nails dry up and will be pulled out from their roots. Then cure the wound by poultice as long as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if the body is converted by default, and many times comes and goes in hands and feet, then it is necessary that you bring fire cauterization; and there are 2 ways: take a piece of iron or metal, or a penknife, and put it on the nail and the splint, which means to burn warts; and put the piece on it so that it burns all around, then put some hot water on it, and firmly hold your hand, and turn your hand so that the margin of the piece comes to the root of the nail, and can find the warm water a deep path up to the root; and let the patient feel a little of the burning of the warm water for an hour; then leave it, and it will be pulled out all its roots. Thus do one after another, until you have eliminated all those who are in the body, then cure the wounds by poultices that generate heat.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	iiij. cauteres or iv. on the spine of the back, i. between each spine; and i. cautery on the foot, and i. on the stomach with the olive cautery. This will stop the shivering, and hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	pustules that emit a pungent odor
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No times appear by defects in the body, or pus-filled pustules, that come from large corrupt matters. It is fitting that at the first appearance of them a fire cautery be made on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire from myrtle wood, which is held to the fire, or from the root of arista long, or with the lens-shaped cautery. And no times are these cauterized at the beginning when they first appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow pus any further, but are broken up; and they are healed, but it is fitting that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When an artery has been cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And so, when it is at hand, if you quickly place your index finger on the vein wound, and carefully strain out as much blood as possible with your other finger, then spurt a little or much olive oil onto the injury and the area around it, until it is all red; then grasp it firmly, either large or small amount according to the wound, taking care to place the fire cautery where you hold your finger, and keep it in place while the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if your finger slips when you hold it over the vein, and the fire cautery goes out, take another fire cautery that is hot from the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make one after the other as long as the blood stops; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that no other evil comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery has been cut short, it cannot be well stopped unless by one of the four ways that we have said: or by cautery, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by firmly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to stop blood; and bind it and strain it well.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a strict treatment of bandages or burning things on it, or other similar things, if he does not benefit from it, then let him try no more.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to no one and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then put your second finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tightly tighten it over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thickened and hardened; and make incisions in front of that which needs cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This is the beginning of the second book on the treatment of wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all the diseases for which fire cauterization, burning medicine, and the tools, shapes, and techniques of cauterization are used; and I have put that chapter at the beginning, and I will go on to this chapter by the same means as we went through the first.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin to teach you this, it is necessary, O son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for this reason greater caution is necessary.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you that you do not undertake folly. For such ways of people come in cures. If they come from those who have so much pride with their disease that they die easily because of the foolishness of their illness, and because of its great severity; then one should be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these I have who give you your sense, and say: "Wait, I am going to die"; and the disease is deceitful. It is not good that you consent to those who come to you who have this way, but put more great confidence in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but carefully from whom you are certain, and from whom you could have taken it and used prophecy and indication in the cures of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and he who will help you to obtain a good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Three times blessed son, may our lords give you good understanding and uprightness, and if you wish for it, may the holy inspiration of his hand come upon you, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have ordered you this ointment in talking about ointments, according to that which is before you, the ointment of the cauterization, that I have devised from the head all the way down to the feet, so that you may find it more easily that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often comes to infants, and when the baby cries it is because the head is too tight; and never comes from any other cause that we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and for this reason it seems to me that I should rather delay the use of this potion in certain remedies.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was swollen with water, and the head of the shoulder twisted every day until he could not hold it up; and he believed so much of the moisture that he died, and this moisture is so gathered around the bone on top of the shoulder, between the neck and the bone; and the use of the potion is so great that the moisture is gathered between the neck and the bone, and the abscesses are small, so cut into the head with a large knife; and be also far away from me as much as 20 steps, until the moisture runs; and see this form of the sputum:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, then make 20 slashes in the form of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head opened on each side, and the water jumps out when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond to you: then you must cut into the head 20 slashes in this way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture. After that, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then take it off, and cure the wound with tar and ointments, and let the head be removed equally, and feed the patient with dry meat of little moisture until the member is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you look at where the great opening of the abscess is, and its insertion into the bone; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never on the right; and it is never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut there where the abscess opens, and its insertion into the bone; for you have the power to do so; and guard against covering the artery; and let blood flow from the wound, so that the patient dies with a clean death from blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	And in conclusion.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is old, and the medicine treatment does not help, then the second treatment is to cauterize with what you cover the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When the patient has a disease called "cataract" in the eyes or in the nose, and the disease is old and the medicine does not help, then, when you cover the patient's eyes, he should hold his head back; after that, he rubs the area with an asperous cloth until the arteries appear, and then pulls out the patient's hair from all sides of the cloth; then look where the vein goes, and the veins on either side are close to the ears, and they have been removed; then sign the veins on either side, and cut them with a sharp blade from both sides at the same time until the cut reaches the bone, and this is done by the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pour the blood out and cauterize above it, cutting as well with the same two blades from top to bottom.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then let it flow continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open on feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of space for .iiii. dos, then sign off and cut up to the bone; and that which is necessary to put blood outside is 1 3/4 c/o, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without a syphac, if the cut that apostemes does not come, then drain the wound and tie it up, and the cure of the poultice until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient emaciation comes, and catarrh obtained, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old-fashioned feverishness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of medical treatments and all that does not benefit it, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient makes a re-growth of the hair on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is little repented outwardly than in some men who are too cold; and if it is repented, then take his colander from some drapelz, then rub the place with any sharp drap, and raise the place of hot water as much as the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where it is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then peel the skin lightly as you come to the artery, then turn it upwards as you would pluck a hair, and remove the thin membrane that covers each part; and if the artery is small, so cut it off with the point of the hook according to the quantity of twenty years. For if it is not cut off, then there will be no saving for all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And turn the blood of the 20 years old child upwards until 13; and if the artery is large, so tie it with two strong threads of silk, that there be no burst before the wound is healed, and turn away from the blood; then cut off the surplus between the two threads at that moment, and then, if you see, so cauterize with the fire cautery until the bone as long as the head is cut; and this is the operation, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is help for finishing the moisture: for what is it of greater help to the moisture?
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is good for extracting the arteries that you fill up the space with fine cotton and put on tents made well; and when you take them off, so cure them with dry medicines that make a new beginning, and of the tents, as long as they are healthy; and if there is no cort of the artery as much as you can do work, so heat by cautery, or you employ the leach of vitriole and strain it in your hand that the juice be strained; and if you have not this, so put on the leach your finger as long as the juice be frozen, and raise the leach of cold water as long as the juice cease, and is extracted as it should be; and that which is wetter and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the veins with a sharp knife of 20 parts, but the cutting should be well kept so that it last longer in heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, so does its heat hold.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there must be between the .ij. tools .i. an inch of space, and then when you have signed off with your 2 knives, and you put a sharp fire on it as long as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in 2 inches; and are distant between the .ij. joints because he is not bonded by this cautery all around; and that is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	For when the tears of the eyes are flowing out from the veins that are above the head of fire, and it does not benefit at all from medicine that we make, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feel or pain if they are tight and moist so that the hair of the papers falls off, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, so there is a need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called the ancient "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then cut.ii. slashes along the forehead evenly according to its length; and make one of the slashes as two whole heads at the top of the forehead by drinking down until it does not smell, and the other two on either side of the bones, and keep from cutting the arteries that are on either side of the bones; and remove your hand from the connection of the two jaws, and each wound is what.ii. pairs by joining;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to wipe out the blood, then pour the spa water from both sides where this form is;
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the first incision which is on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the cur that is between the two slashes to the bone, then do the same on the other side from the middle incision until the other second one, and then pour out this spa water.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if in the first slash you use the instrument that is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and soft on the other, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut the cost of bending towards the horse's back at its tail, and the cost of bending to the bone, and let it bend as far as the middle cut. And cover all the vessels that descend from the head with hair until the incision is continuous until that which opens at the tail, and then do it in the middle cut until the other end; and then take out the blood evenly, and express the place for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton into each cut, and put drape on them wet with wine and oil and honey, and keep that the abscesses don't come; and on the third day undo the ligature, and bring a great amount of water to drink, then cure him with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures that heal wounds until he is well.
dou reume des eulz	to the tail
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is a catarrh by custom, and you see the eyes watering and small papules, and the vision grows dim, and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and at the head it hurts greatly, and the patient sneezes; then know that these matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the moist heat cure that I have described is good for this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to stare at himself in the mirror, then make a great cut across the forehead, and another from side to side. Then begin with the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he sneezes; and when the bone is uncovered, if you wipe all the blood with a sponge, then tie cotton wool and linen thereon; then lie drapes soaked in wine and oil on it, and be careful not to burn the aposteme. When it has been raised, if you rub the bone until char starts to form, then heal with drying substances that produce char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take .ij. parts of wheat flower, and .iiij. parts of kohl, and make an ointment thereof; and apply it to these wounds in order that char may be produced everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the sticking up of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is stuck up in ears is one of the .iiij. things: or grain, or beast, or small stone or similar thing; or seed, if like grains, beans, peas; or flowing thing, if like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	If the stone is in the ear or another thing that does not fit into the ear and does not stay in place when put there, then put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then distil a little violet oil or sesame oil, then it will be extracted; and when it is being extracted, then the nose will stop up, and pieces of cloth or wool will be put around the ear, and the ear will be brought up. Many times this treatment brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then it should be extracted with very small forceps, from which comes this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with forceps, that is good; if not, then extract it with very small forceps; and if it does not come out with them, then make a thread of air and put the tip of the thread or some other thing into the ear very strongly, and stop up what is inside the ear with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the thread; then try again, for many times this treatment brings relief; and if it does not bring relief in any way, then take a drop of gluten, as it is taken from the oats, and put some cotton into it; then press the gluten onto the stone or whatever it is, and try again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not come out with any of these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear so as not to leave an abscess or spasm; and the way to split it is that you make the first incision on the head of the malady according to the measure of its virtue, then put the malady between your hands and turn the ear up, and make a small split at the root of the ear in the fat or where it depends; and let the split be as wide as the moon until you feel the stone, then take hold of it with your power, and suck it carefully into your mouth; and the treatment is to continue until it is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that is stuck and swells, administer extraction; and if it cannot be removed, administer .i. spatium ileum in this manner:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And administer incision of that grain. But do not make it when you think the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract them finely and at the hairline, as we said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	So that the patient uses a stream of water in the first place, and widens the ear with old cotton. And let it rest on that ear where the fluid is. If it jumps out, it is good. If not, take many stones according to your finger's length and make them light; and heat them a little on the fire; and put one of them in his ear and cut one from the other end, and keep doing so until the fluid comes out entirely, and thus let it all go; and if you see that, take 1.i. straw, and bottle one of the ears, and the other ear take from the fire as much as the straw is burned; then make another straw again, and heat it on the fire until the more burning straw is black; then refire another, and so on until the fluid comes out entirely, as we said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small course, such as a flea or similar thing, cure it as we said in the division; but if it is a large course that we can feel it, administer extraction with the pince-nez; and this is the lighter thing to extract which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	When extracting worms from the ears, if the cure does not work as we have described in the division and treatment of distillation, and the ear is open to any worms, then take them out with subtle pincers, and if they are not seen, take the root where the shape is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make it narrow at the top and wide at the bottom. Pour in the subtlest oil into the ear according to the amount of suffering from the patient, then suck out the form completely; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not want to come out, stop between the roots with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise up as we have described, administer distillation which has been tried by the old for extracting worms, and you will find it where the distillation is treated; and if you distil your oils and medicines into the ear with all these instruments, then this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or gold narrow at the top and wide at the bottom, and for distillation; and for pressing the distillation inwardly a tool of silver well made for this, and if you see one with a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you have in the cainne (cannibal), and let the cainne be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or draining from the ear; and smell the patient's breath, and let the distillation be heated on the fire as it is distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	For the stumping of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No children are born with any ears missing; and the same thing happens to men by accident of a wound, or a cart falling in their ear, and such accidents never completely come out of the ear, if one cannot see them; and there is no such thing as a small hole in it, and he can see very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So that which comes out completely, if one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many conditions, and in this it is necessary to put the ear of the sick under the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the wound has completely cured all this pus, from which there comes this sputum, from which comes this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sure to clean and trim the hair in front of and behind completely, so that it does not cut the ear; if the operation is a cart falling or a corn in the ear, if it has many small pinches, and lightly cover it, until that corn is completely healed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the operation is completely in the ear, take a very fine and light razor and heat it slightly, then put it on the corn of the ear. If you feel the operation that the sick man feels as a grating at the hearing, cut lightly, and be sure to not injure the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the hole, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make no fire for as long as the wound is still hot, or take a tent and soak it in rose water, and powder with vitriolic broth; and if you see that it has flown into the ear, then remember that you must take the tent and move another tent that has been soaked in wax, which has been made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling has gone down; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes from fever, dip an sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that are made from distilleries to heal the fever which causes the pain, which are or are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper char
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take the althel (a plant) which comes in paper-like forms when it is moist and dry, if it reminds you of tiny nails and pins, and cut it with a scalpel from its roots; then place it on rose water broth.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if not chopped off, if the fire cautery of the lenticular cautery, and the cautery maker after incision moves away; and many times they grow back again, none of them stays put in their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned, and do not come back.
de la gresle	of the sore
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Makes the hair fall out in patches, like straw, in shape and hardness resembling the latter; therefore this illness is called "hay fever," and is an assembly of moisture, thick in the hair above it; so do: take care that the hay does not drop from one side to the other, and burn it lightly, piece by piece, then pluck it out with tweezers, and if you cannot pluck it out without piercing the hair, do not worry about it; and if it is a big split, sew it up, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not force it, for the oilmen will restore it soon enough and cause trouble.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the hay falls down inside the ear towards the top part, turn the hair over, and pluck out the hay with tweezers, and cope it and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not worry about it; and when the hay has been plucked out, leave the oil of salt water, and cure the place where it itches until the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	is made from the fat of the eyes, and this happens more often in children who are not yet weaned, and it hurts their eyes very much; they have a lot of mucus that comes out in the morning, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears come quickly to their eyes; and because of this, they lay down their faces and sleep, and their eyelids are moist with the exinach which is made into oil. And when you squeeze the fat between your fingers and feel the exinach come out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	The way to do this is so that the sick person puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and make a tent out of it in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exirnach in each part, and put it over him; and press with your fingers from one side and from the other, so that the exirnach is gathered together in the middle; then cut with a sharp knife an opening of the right size for the wound that you are making on the side of the head; and make the skin all round so that you come to the exirnach; and in several places the exirnach comes out of the opening, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take away then all of a piece of linen cloth between your hands on the right side, and turn your hand to the left and to the right as it becomes scattered; and be careful not to stir in the opening, that you do not come to the spatumile jusc'à l'huile, que vous ne le faites pas.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if he does not emerge in the beginning of the split, but rather a little bit more, split it lightly until it appears; then extract it as we said, then wet the cloth with water and place it on its place, and pull out the splints.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such men who grind salt and put on top so that this moisture that has been delayed is corrupted. Then heal them until they are well. And if it comes to the base of an abscess, if the healer soothes it with poultices until they are well.
des poilz des papieres	of hair from papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hair comes out, it should be thrown away or burned; if it remains, it will harm the eyes and cause all kinds of diseases as do tears, soft papery things, and albinism, until they are destroyed; and the cure is according to the following four methods: either with fire cauterization, or with medicine based on what it is in front of, or a chapster of cauterization, and it is done by incising and suturing or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then take the oil paper in your left hand; if it curls, that is good; but if not, pour an needle into all i. a thread over it; and be this deliciously at the margin of the paper where the hairs grow out of them, and run the thread over all the spatula, filling up the great wound to the little one; then remove the thread, and put the paper away for a little bit of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper a figure of an ear, like a mirth leaf, and anyway it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a lot that needs to be done with the paper according to what you see fit; then make on all the spatula over the ii. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great wound to the little one; and let it be like the size of a root in the crevice near the hairs, then pour the oil into one of the ii. angles of which, then scorch it all; then join the ii. lips to a stitch of a needle over all i. thread of fine wool, and wash away the blood, and make to fly the surplus of the threads over the ii. notches on anything sticky, if you see to do this; and if not, if you are not concerned, then leave the stitch and the threads until ii. or iii. days; then cure the wound without a stitch of dried and constricting things, because the paper softens at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the stitch is old (as they say), and it is work with doubt and fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is also like the shape of a mirth leaf, as we have told, with iii. needlesdevised according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then cut those that surmount with small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	If you cannot hold the forceps and the thing is not even, then take an awl or there is a thread, and bend it to the shape; and another thread of fine wire, and another thread of thick wire, and assemble them evenly between your two hands; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have tied it, as we have told you, then assemble the 16.i. lips of the wound with stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then anoint it with cerate and similar ointments that soothe;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there is no time when the hair of the paper has been converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for the wound is as follows: and it is necessary that you convert the paper and place it within according to what I have said, and then make 16.i. stitches, and 16.i. threads slightly thicker than the thread used for the paper, and tie them together slightly above where the paper ends; and let it rest for some days, and the skin that has been stretched will become firm and will heal, until it is healed by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If he is delayed, if the cope has forced him, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they cannot grow more hair; and this is the form of the two legs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	If he is delayed, and the cope has forced him, then treat him until he is healthy; and when the wound is closed, and if the paper is lifted, and they cannot grow more hair; and this is the form of the two legs that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide: li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aiguille subtil, et i boute 1 fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l'un et l'autre subtilement, et soit la longueur des fils une palme de long; puis ordonne en la chasse 1 autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li maliadous son chef en ton sain; et soit délez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit déclariez, car c'est uns ovraiges subtils et menus, puis boute l'aiguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajosteit, et la fais percer en la papiere hastement tant que tu lat tire desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s'il en i a 1 ou 2 ou 3 ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz venent fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the wound is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then draw the wound away to all the thread that you have ordered, until the wound comes out by the perforation on top and you can see it by the vision of the oil; then draw the wound and the thread, and let the oil and leave it 1 or 2 or 3 or more; then draw the hair back with that which you leave behind, until the hair is standing in its place and grows up; and if the hair is small, then accompany 1 long hair from the natural hair, and let it hang with that which you leave behind, until it is stretched out and then let it down.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil fever
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or oil fever, appears in two ways: one is natural and the other is unnatural. And it happens suddenly through wound, or injury, or fire, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the way to treat this is to cut and separate the lips of the wound and insert linen cloth inside, and let it remain until it heals; and do not use anything that dries and constricts. For if you do so, the disease will return worse than before. But use things that soften, such as fenugreek; and water or ale or linseed oil be boiled, and an ointment made with melted dyal-oil, and wrap a cloth around it, and treat with it.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you do not let it harden in the form that it was before; and the herbs we have mentioned are only to be used as a remedy for this disease, so that it does not return in the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the horse that comes to the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This is the translation:
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the text translated into English:
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from wounds, cuts, or cauterization, you shall insert a needle with 2 threads into the left armpit until it reaches the right, so that the thread emerges at 2 chins on the char; then lift the char above all the needle, and put a spatemile with a wide base.
dou soudement de la papiere	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the first sentence of the text:
de l’ungle de l’oil	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of the incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then he works the hairs; and take the paper to your hand, then coil the unglove on the little double-fingered fingers, and raise it up; then take an needle, and I put .i. hair of a horse, or of a she-ass, or of an ox, and .i. strong thread; and double the point of the needle a bit and let the unglove slip off the thread, and pierce all the needle, and tie the unglove with a thread and raise it up, and peel off all the hair the cost of the unglove which follows the seed and the silk to the hair jusc’to the head, then cut the remaining in the root of the larmier to all the spatumile subtle and small forces, and leave the tear natural or larmier, so that by the incision does not come out the cors des larmes acostumeement; and never raise the unglove only, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off all the spatumile suff of coi here is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep that the spatumile does not touch the charnual canvas and break it, and that the seed is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little bit of oil of seiwet, and of colier made of litargie, and leaves it until the next day; then cure him as much as he is sane.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the unglove is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, this resemblance of the unglove of medicines is often cured; and are born sicom I have told in the division, and if you see it coper, then work the oil of the patient, and take the spatumile light poc according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the finger slowly, and see that it does not become thinner and its root becomes more pressing, so pour from your mouth oil of the ring made of litargite and red dye and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again another work according to this same work, until it is all boneless.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if nothing is opposite to it in oil, as an abscess, then the milk, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then begin again the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts a lot in oil due to great damage, then suspend it for a long time, and take a part of it and not all at once, so that tears do not come; then pour into the oil ring red, which is made of litargite.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that comes out on the apricot
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l'incision de l'ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cet chapitre lou demostre.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Now let's begin with the translation of the first sentence:
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you adjust the cure for each weak oil of the natural path; and of the accidental path, in fire ovulation; and do not put your hand into any of these ovulations until you see that the limbs are suffering from that ovulation.
des voines des eulz	the hairs of the body
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	the hairs of the head
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two oncines in width in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then coiled the delicate hairs together with care, and washed the blood away hour by hour until you see the hairs removed completely from the oil; and be careful not to burn the oil at the tips of the spatulums, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very careful in your handling so that only the hair is burned; and when you have finished this, distil into the oil green and red essence to corrupt what remains of the hair.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot catch all of them in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days as long as the pain is soothed and is assured by the apothecary warm, then begin again according to this method which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	Here comes the translated text:
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, then reset all the instruments of which this form is composed; it is called "aspre chief", and let be made from there to 1.5 chief, and be pointed as a lime, as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the top of the bone that is rotten, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand upon it a little while until you can feel that the corruption has stopped; and do this once, then return to the top of the medicated poultice.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is tight and the wound is closed, and the cors of the bow is tight, and remains so for two days, and does not open again and cause harm, then know that it is healthy; if not, then there is another device than to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the nose according to this form: and this is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines that are bitter, and when it is uncovered then take it .i. forethat according to this form, and let the iron be at .iij. angles, and let the string be thin up to the top so as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the iron gently on the bone of the nose, and keep your hand away from the oil .i. little, then turn completely back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain through it so that his hand remains on his nose; and then return to the top of the dried medicines, as I have taught you, and when the char is born and hardens the leus, if the material goes into the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil's issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are completely removed from all parts, and do not come back again until they grow, then you must put on a hot iron so that it may open; then, when it has opened, apply oil to it made of acacia, and aloe, and incense, and myrrh; then draw out the oil, and anoint with it bandages and cloths; and the way of the cloths is this: you must twist them together enough so that they are double each one, then put one on top of another according to the quantity needed for the hair; then draw them out over a hard cloth-like object, and begin again with the oil-drawers without hurting; then take off the oil-drawers and leave the oil drawn out day and night, and if it becomes thin, you must draw it out more; then take off the bandages after the day and the night, and if you see that the oil repairs itself, it is good; if not, then begin again with the anointing and the cloths and the iron and the oil-drawers until they are well.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	When the web of silk that covers the body is torn away.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When the silk web that covers the body is torn away, it will look like grains of resin, and you can see it; then if you cover it with a cloth, the treatment is such that you pierce a needle into the root of the part just below it, then you take another needle where there are two threads from the arm part; and let the first needle be according to the disposition, then take one of the threads and tie one side of the silk around it, and draw it tightly, then remove the needle and put a drop of oil on the other thread; and leave it until the thread vibrates with the silk, then cure the oil with soothing things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound with silk circles around each part until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are long and even, let them pierce a thin spikelet that comes perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture-white albinous and draw the hairs, and insert it so often; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the oil bow
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but a bow that is assembled in oil, resembling water descending, and yet it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the chapter so is this: you make the patient sit with his seat apparently upright, then take his chief between your hands from both sides, and hold the hair as much as you see the bow come up to your hair; then let it sit firmly, and do not descende or move it, and see the light of the patient's hair, and know that it is water, and that the descent of the bow is not apparently appeared as we have said. If you make the patient sit with his seat apparently upright, then take the thin spikelet and pierce it into the cornee film 1 par .i. poc through the continuation of the connective with the cornee film and the crown, until it comes out; and when it is issued, let it be distilled in hot honeyed oil, or water or fenugreek is boiled and honey added, then let it be cured by other means until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil bow
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the appearance of needles in the division, and what is necessary to pierce it; if done according to health. It is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and bind the healthy oil tightly; then place the paper of the oil on your left hand if the nails are left-handed, or on your right hand if they are right-handed; then take in your right hand, if the nails are left-handed, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if the nails are right-handed; then place the point of the instrument at the crown of the oil by its thickness in a ray in that bright part of the oil to the less wound, and then bottle the instrument called 'almagda' well, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the bright part of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at the perfect measure of the space which is from the plumule until the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the oil. Then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the cloth cornified, and then place the instrument up to the level where the needle is, and express one path after another. The needle now comes out, so look at the patient before you and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a short rest, and the needle rises again on the second path, put force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and no longer rises, draw almagda lightly by turning your hand little by little; and then put a little of the oil of sweet bay leaves into the needle, and remove from that oil inside. Then place by the side the dried oil or a moist one in oil rosin and in much smoke, and bind with healthy oil. We, and those who are of our time, let us put on common broiet with much smoke.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If almagda cannot enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men who have too thick nails, it is necessary that you press the instrument called 'alberit', which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then cut the conjunctive only, and don't overdo it too much, but make it .i. thin, then pour in the almond oil, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient .i. the sleeping one coming, where he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and he should be deprived of all movement, and press light meats, and do not move his head nor to the right nor to the left, and bind him according to his disposition until three days; then unbind him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you bind him, for he will go up quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And when the abscesses have come to head, you should unbind the oil before the seventh day, and address it from that which softens the abscess; and when it is calmed, if you unbind the sight and put on his face  .i. an edge to cover any day, and remain in that same dark house. And then go out little by little, and turn around in his cases; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Yraq, who told us that in their country they used to pour almond oil, so that it would suck up the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the nature of alchemy, so that those who do not know them may see them; and let them be pure brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the head of this middle substance be water, and the behind in three angles dry.
de la char sor le neis	of the stone on the fire
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	And here are the various stones that emerge from the fire: some seem to be scorpions at the tip of a needle; and if there is one such stone that has been charred by fire and colored, and another stone that is soft, then you should set the patient between your hands towards the sun; and open his nostrils, and pour the oil on those stones, and warm them well; then take the oil which you have kept aside, prepared from the subtle essence, as long as you know that this stone is completely hard.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, then open all the vessels subtly and lightly, so that nothing stays; and if without rising above, or an abscess, dry it as it should; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the swelling is dried up and all the pus is drained, then throw or pour easily and quickly.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, then open all the vessels subtly and lightly, so that nothing stays; and if without rising above, or an abscess, dry it as it should; and if these are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them until the swelling is dried up and all the pus is drained, then throw or pour easily and quickly. If there remains a sore, and moisture comes to the palate, know that it is healthy; and if the moisture penetrates as it should, know that it has not entered the bone above, and so the instrument will not cut: therefore it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread of medium thickness, and tie it tightly with hands, and space between each knot about an inch or less; and put the thread into the sore at the power of the hand, and draw it out while smelling it frequently until it comes out through the mouth; and many times do this to the child in school, and this is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the thread that comes out by the nose with one hand, and the other hand holds the thread that comes out of the mouth, and know which comes first as we do with the threads; and if you know that the knot has corrupted that cord, then draw the thread, wash the sore, and dip the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the hole as before; do this for three or more days until the ointments have eaten away whatever is held by the cord; and then put a string of cork some days longer until he is well, and if he needs drying medicines, then use them. And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nose, whereon oil and medicine are distilled in the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a cord, and conduct it also; and if you see, make a closed cord, and be the instrument plain to purge the nose; and have one always with the nose to hold it while the oil or any liquid is heated.
de la char sor le neis	of the neck from the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease occurs in the neck from the nose which is called "throb", and grows and becomes very big until it can be seen with the eye; and for this it is necessary that you cut at the beginning of the bone, then put fire on it; and if you delay to do so much as it is big, if it is hard, of red color, of poor smell: if not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, because when you cut it, many evil come to the patient; and this abscess is to be touched gently, not with iron of red color, and you see that you can cover it completely, if you empty the patient and cut it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck has been cut and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the neck has been cut and cured
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way of the stitch is that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in the stitch of the belly; or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	the sores on the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For in the hands, sore-like blisters appear on the lips, small and large; then cover them with a patch, cut it into each one, and wrap it with plasters; then apply the place with vitriolic broth, until the sores are dried out; and then wash that place with water, and cure that place with dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maitres often naissant on the gums with a sore that the old call "albulus"; if it is necessary for you to hold them with tweezers, and tie them at their root, and let the bowels or blood run; then put over the place vitriolic powder, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this sore returns after the incision, and often comes, if the powder is laid on again, and cauterized: if it does not return after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments to bind.
des sordens	of remedies
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Of remedies: No times are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, knots that are ugly and rough; and no times are the tooth black and citron and wormy, as soon as the corruption comes to the gum, and are the tooth stinky; if it is necessary for you to make sit the disease between your hands, and its roots lie in your hand, and pluck out the teeth or knots that appear, as long as it does not stay anything; and thus do of blackness and verdure, and of yellowness and other taches, until they are clean; and if one is at the first razing, it is good; if not, if it begins to rase again on the second day and third, as long as you have all plucked out; and know that the tooth has need of diverse forms of instruments to pluck out, according to what the operation demonstrates, because of the rasor with which one plucks out the teeth have other forms than those with which one plucks out between the teeth; and these forms and others are with you apparelled.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait to pull it as long as you can, because this must not be done at all; for it is a high-spirited substance until then there is no excuse to pull it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And now when the disease is constricted by drawing out, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth that hurts. Often the pain in the disease leaves, and he believes that it is the sound tooth, and he makes to draw out the good tooth; however, the pain does not go away because of this, until the disease comes out, for we have already tried to do this with these elders; and when you are certain of the tooth that hurts, so it is necessary that you file around the tooth on all sides with a strong file; then you move it with your fingers or small pliers at the first poking and poking until it is well drawn out, then you tighten the pliers well; and let the head of the disease be in your saint between your knees, and he holds fast so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After you have drawn out the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fit, then take any of these instruments and squeeze it in from all sides lightly, and move it as you did first. And if the space is narrowed and closed, then it is necessary that you fill it with swabs, where the teeth are; and if you hold it firmly with small pliers, so that it does not break when you draw it out; and it is necessary to work carefully around the gum to pull the tooth out.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And do well to avoid breaking it, and if a part remains, and return it to the disease by the malice of the root, which causes greater pains than the first. And do well that you do not act in this way as does the ignorant elder, who, by his haste and boldness, often breaks none but the cart, and never makes any but the ones we have described; but brings about nothing but the question of that great disease at the roots that he delays, or by the cart that he breaks, just as we have often wanted to do; and when the tooth is drawn out, if it is washed with wine or garlic and dill; and they escape from without, so often does it come about, if one employs the vitriol brooch; and if this does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of large members so that they do not bend while pulling, and be of good cast iron, and be tooth to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root of the tooth is painful to pull, if it is necessary that you put cotton moistened with butter on the spot, as long as the roots are soft, then the pliers which are called "algefri" should be used; and let the shapes be made like a file, for this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the whole char [a type of vehicle] around the root, and put the instrument which is called "al-thalī' " [in Arabic], that is to say palainche, by which this form is made:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by this [the instrument], it is good; if not, help yourself with all the instruments, by which these forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has .ij. [a number] of rays, by which this form is made:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are before in the shape of teeth, and of this instrument which seems like a great plier, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this instrument not broken, for many of the instruments within are; and also other instruments, which are not numbered; and the masters of subtlety try out their own instruments themselves according to that which their works and the disease demonstrate, because there are many diseases in which the old do not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the carriage or the other bones on which it rides, if he seeks the instruments that are needed, that I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be this instrument heavy and firm to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but can hold it and remove it; and then restore its place with suitable medicines for him, and if there is rot in the bone, and it is small, then all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural shape of the jaw, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, then it is necessary that you know if the tooth is under the gum, and is not in its right place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then take this instrument; and if it is long with a little bend, then make this instrument like a small pick, and make of iron, as it was made:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap is put on and on the hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then take a fine file like this instrument:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se déplace pas tant qu’il grince; puis la plaine à la fin à tout aucun rasoir, et le fond est trop tranchant et il brule la langue, alors il faut limer l’aspretéité jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit lisse, de manière qu'il ne brûle pas la langue ni n'altère pas la parole.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth loosen...
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth loosen... When the teeth loosen, whether by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on what he chews so as not to choke, and you have treated them with restrictive medicines, this will not help; but if you restrain them with a gold wire, because silver wire becomes green and腐rot, but gold wire never moves; and choose a thin or thick wire according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any looseness in one tooth, take the wire and double it around the healthy tooth next to it, then place the chewed food between the two teeth, if there are more than two loosed, until you have tightened them enough so that they no longer move; and if the wire comes loose, tie it again with another wire; if it takes a long time to tighten, leave it in place, and if it becomes loose again, tie it with another wire. Then cut the wire at the roots of the teeth so that it cannot escape; then wrap the wire around the healthy tooth next to it so that it does not hurt the tongue; and then let it tighten as long as possible, and if it comes loose again, or the wire becomes loose, tie it with another wire. If it takes a long time to tighten, leave it in place, and this will serve for all its length; and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the adjustment of the healthy and chewed teeth.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se déplace pas tant qu’il grince; puis la plaine à la fin à tout aucun rasoir, et le fond est trop tranchant et il brule la langue, alors il faut limer l’aspretéité jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit lisse, de manière qu'il ne brûle pas la langue ni n'altère pas la parole.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the links of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	de copper the links of the tongue
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you notice a dark or hard spot that the patient cannot feel or touch, for it is cancer; and if it has blueness and moisture, then pour on the oncine, and make a fine paste of it, and deliver it with a spatula from one part to another; and if he does not improve to your treatment, put on vitriolic brooth as long as it is stained, and then return to your treatment as long as you continue; then lift up the aisel and sea water, and cure him with other remedies until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	None. The text starts with a discussion of treating dislocations and the different types of joint dislocations. Here is the translated line-by-line:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	None. The text continues with a discussion of treating abscesses and the tools used to do so. Here is the translated line-by-line:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	None. The text then provides an alternative method for creating the instrument if the previous one is not available:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And cut from one side and not the other; and when you have chopped one of the mandarins, chop the other according to the same method, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and sharp and soft, and they remove blood if it comes, so gargarize the patient with water, or juice of cooked pomegranates, or leaves of myrrh, and similar things until the blood is stopped; then treat him until he is well; and never emerge in the throat other abscesses than the 2. mandarins, if they are chopped just as the 2. mandarins.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I treated a woman for an abscess that was stuck in her throat, which is to say 1. an abscess of small size; and I had it shut up so well that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like that for 1. day or 2. days. The abscess was so high that it had been rained on 2. times from the 2. openings where it was stuck. So I waited a while, and then inserted one of my 1. needles into the one opening, and drew some blood out, and after drawing out the blood, I squeezed the needle into the abscess, and pushed some of it in, and there came out only a little drop of blood; and thus unblocked the passage in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and she did not stop cutting off that abscess for quite a long time; and the abscess started growing again, and filled up the space I had cleared out, until it was very large; then I put it back into place and cauterized it in her throat: so it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and there were only 2. things that God did for them after me.
de l’uve	of wine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the sun burns his head and it is gone away and far away, so it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and round, so it is called "uve". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, and you see that the chaps of the abscess are calmed down, and they are subtle, then you should chop them; and those who are roundly assembled and not far away; and if they are blood or black color or dark-colored, so it is necessary to avoid the incision. For there is great danger on the sick person. Therefore, when you see it, according to the way that I have said, of its blenchor and its longness, that you make him sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue to the instrument of which we have spoken before; then put the scalpel in the "uve", and turn them roundly, and cover them with .i. .ij. instruments that I said in the incision of .ij. mandorles. And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of .ij. mandorles, and cure until it is well. And if the sick person has fear of covering, then you should use an instrument for cauterization according to his fear. The way of cauterizing is sharp water. And it is that the sick put his head on your side, and then press his tongue to the instrument that we have said or "chapitre" of cauterizing, and confound with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by using this handle of this instrument, from which there is this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	"And this cure is more safe of the incision or cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation according to this way, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them in 1/4 pot, and put it there like this, and let it boil; and the pot is well covered with strong soil, and pour the water into 1/4 instrument chaped according to this way:"
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And of silver or gold, and one of the bottles squirted in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapour rises through the vein, until the blood is chilled; after he begins to speak often, until the blood is dried, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess hot, because many things come from it; and do not make this but at the decline of the hotness of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in his head a hook of blood, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the hook of blood does not let the vapour heavy the mouth, and this is good together and saves health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it rises in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing; so that it is convenient that you take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun on all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not open for you and is put back in the throat, it is convenient that you make the patient vomit so that his meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if this thing is ejected by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or .i. piece of dry bread; and to the sponge there is a thread, and then he swallows it; and when it comes to the point, if it moves, and then you pull hard; and if it does not come hard from what we have said, then take one instrument of plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And take the instrument curved at the tip so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised up high; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, that none of them comes down, or do not push the bone in; and move the instrument so that the patient swallows it, for this thing or that thing is moved; if it swallows the bottle, or he spits it out with all the instrument evenly, until it is thrown.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No time is medicine of the blood, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient under the sun, because you press the tongue with the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the blood, so take a fine hook or tweezers that are worth to him. And if he does not work, so take a razor, and bottle it in the throat of the patient, then bottle or cut it with the blade of the razor often. And if the patient is dark all day. then take a full cup of cold water, and open the mouth, and drink it in, and move it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood feels the water, so spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if she does not spit as we have said, then sublimate the patient with ash, at the instrument that I have said in the smoke treatment of the uvula; do this many times, because it will not spit without it. And the way of the smoke treatment is that you press a pot or one who has charbons visible, and put a cover over it so that it covers the center, and on the hole where the instrument is; then pour your smoke treatment, and the patient puts the tip of the razor in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not go out, but comes to the blood; and the blood will come now, and if it does not spit, then begin the smoke treatment again by many times; and make the patient thirsty, and eat salty things and bitter, and do not drink water; and then the proper time will come when she spits through this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to consider how you treat the blood, is if you can see it, like a pair of tweezers that are bent at the end, so that they can enter into the throat; and has the appearance of an instrument to take care of the uvula, and has the hardness of lime, so that whatever he takes, he cannot let go; and consider this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the Kapitel of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The Kapitel of abscesses are, according to this reminder that comes from one and the other in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and incision; and it is in 2 ways. The first is in their appearance, and from what he has held moisture. And the second way is for the joints where they are in place. For the abscess at the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the limb is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if an abscess does not need to be pierced, as long as the bow is dead according to its fulfillment; and if it is of such that it must be pierced when it is ripe, and do not die according to its fulfillment, as is the abscess which comes from delicate joints. For when an abscess comes from delicate joints, and we leave it entor until it is rotten, by chance if the ligature and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is the cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is from the principle member, and if you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the principle member; or it is from the fundament, if you pierce it thus as if it were dead; and it does not convenie that you pierce a ripe abscess without digestion accomplished, lest that which is from the fundament should not rot completely, and be alonged inside, and come to a fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it convenies that you know the hour of the piercing of the abscess which is dead according to its fulfillment, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departure of the fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the debatement and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it convenies that you cause the piercing to take place where there is most blood, and the abscess is in the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all the limbs equally where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that are plied, according to the member. And when abscesses are in their natural position, so as not to leave the perforation until it is confirmed that digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you allow the blood to flow from him, and it is plain with much filth; and by chance they harden the lips and his depth. And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members require. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses are there that need to be chewed and covered; when they have become as hard as drapes, and are deadened, it is necessary to do so as you do with blisters: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that you cover as you would a mirth seed, like abscesses of the arms; and if there are such that you make a round size, and other sizes and a supposed covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	In those that are plied, according to the member. And when abscesses are in their natural position, so as not to leave the perforation until it is confirmed that digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you allow the blood to flow from him, and it is plain with much filth; and by chance they harden the lips and his depth. And if there is any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the members require. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if such abscesses are there that need to be chewed and covered; when they have become as hard as drapes, and are deadened, it is necessary to do so as you do with blisters: and if there are such that are split into three angles, and if there are such that you cover as you would a mirth seed, like abscesses of the arms; and if there are such that you make a round size, and other sizes and a supposed covering.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pain of an abscess is coming to your work, so amenister cold water and soon, and moile .i. drapel, and place over the running one by maintes times. And if the pain of an abscess persevere, so amenister government and cure, and the powders that I said in your hands in this book, and if it is or has tens ofiver, and li leus where li apostemes is mout nervous, so it is necessary that you put sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mettes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nous avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in the treatment of abscesses: or I have told you how one should go before in the treatment of abscesses, and see this ointment.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And the cure for sore legs and feet, and they are managed in such a way that they are in webs, just as the cutting of a rope, and so much in common with the cutting of a beard, and there is also of them which are fat and of such as have moisture also, and such as are hard and rocky to cut, and there is no doubt if the arteries go against it. And the work of the waist so that you experience all .i. instrument which is called "entromissoire" (intruder), of which the form follows in the following text, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, it comes out by itself; and when it is empty, it does not leave the hair which contains that moisture, because it returns to itself when you let it be; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and oil, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and heal the wound with ointment, according to what is convenient, until it is healthy. And if the abscess is thick, so the cupping follows this form, of the leg; and you cut off your nails, and scorch all sides, and put all your cure by dipping into the shirt or where it lies; and if the artery goes against it, do what I have said after. And also treat the abscess if it is rocky, and cutting the hair and curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cut on the thick and moist abscess, so it is lighter, because it has a little blood. And if there are any of these abscesses or chief that do not have moisture, and such as these are those that I described or chief of an old woman; and I found the abscess just like a hard, rough and white stone, which could not be broken; and if one had cut it, it would also have made a wound like a stone. In other abscesses coming or chief, so that they come to the most dependent part, in order that the bow may be released; and cure them as is fitting.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Mouths have come to the collar, and broken the joints, and had sores, and none of them has moved to another place or died, but they are wet, and have gone into each other. And each scrofula is properly inside its rib, as the notch and the apotheosis of the neck, as we said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health. In this case, when you see a good appearance in the chest, and it is similar in color to the flesh, and does not move from any side, and is not deep; so it is right that you cover it from above, and scorch each part, and are the 21 teeth of the teeth on both sides, if you need them, as we said about the apotheosis of the neck; and cut it little by little, and be sure that you do not cover the nerve or the vein, and do not go too far forward, so that you do not cover what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put vinegar in the wound, or some powders that stop the flow of blood, and strip the wound; and leave it until the apotheosis is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the root of the scrofula is well, if there is no small scrofula there, then cut it and wash it away. And if there is a large scrofula at the root, then it is not right that you cut the scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without any harm; then employ the wound with old cotton dipped in olive oil, and then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you join together the 21 lips of the wound and sew them up immediately, so that there is no delay from excessive enlargement of the scrofula; then it is necessary that you listen to how to patch the root of it and squeeze it hard, and sew it up as we have said. Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce where it opens; and pierce in this way too, depending on, so that it mixes with blood and similar things, so that it corrupts those who are delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then heal it with ointment, as long as it is healthy.
de squinance	of squint in the eye
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke and wrote about the size of the throat; but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and it is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the fender of the throat (epiglotte) be removed; and no one should help him because all the veins and the mouth are hot because of the disease.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is in the throat due to a pommon, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to flee from the death which comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we split it of two circles or three little splits across, between two circles or by the quantity of the split from the syph, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if they are suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no bridge, and the vessel is long from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, and then splits the meat as far as it comes to the chin; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cover the syph, as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is demonstrated by the section of the vein that has been broken out of place, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leaves the wound open a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by of which one doubts the strangulation, close the two lips of the wound on either side, and the cut all down to the cartilage; then administer medicines that promote health, as long as they are healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: "Do not do this until the throat is completely closed, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect leaves it."
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	And then the old man should order that the wound be left open as long as the sickness is passing, and it will pass in three or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they should sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	For I have seen this before;
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a damsel take .i. a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut part of the chins from her face.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had flowed from it, and I saw well that she had not cut a vein but only her throat, and the blood had flowed out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and I healed it until it was well;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there came to the maiden such a hoarse voice, and she returned after her condition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I fear that in the surgery of the epiglottis there will be no pain.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	is called "hernia of the throat", and is a large hernia in the color of a yellow egg, and is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and is according to .ij. manners: nature, and accident; or natural has no device.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to  .ij. manners, one is similar to fat us, and another manner is similar to an abscess that comes from us of arteriovenous;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it has fear, and does not come to work of fire in that which is little, and tests and seeks in all the intramuscular;
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	If you find it as well as .ij. fat, and cannot for any reason, if the cap is on, as we put the caps on us, and try to all its coat, if there is any point;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well soon, and treat him as it is necessary, until he is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways to do this, all of which I will describe;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I give all the difference which exists between us and what happens.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and chills are issued, as long as the boiling is passed, and the poulticing is accomplished; then rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With it the not there is no fever or heat or pain, and contains. i. siac, which is his own sack and is according to the color of the heart, and begins also as a seed, and becomes fat; and
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to iij sembrances, or grease, or moist, and most of the colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of the not, that you try and question first all the instrument which is called "intramisoire", according to what its form will or the paste which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the way to examine an abscess is that you squeeze or more moist place than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumb little by little until you know that the instrument has hit the core, then that be according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then remove the instrument, and take care that it does not hurt.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture runs fast, that it be colored, then do as I said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the instrument there is no moisture, know that it is oily, then take it in two pins, and burn it lightly on each side, and keep the core where it lies, or you will have it healthy with the oil;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, then pull it out piece by piece so that nothing is left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will come back to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little time, and it does not bother you, then use some corrosive water to extract the wound, and put something soothing on it, and apply other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is very large, then cut the 3/4 of the wound, and treat it with this mixture:
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if you have batans or another wound and you are in a hurry and apply the place of vitriolic broach, and leave it 21 days or 23, until the wound is putrid, and let the blood be warmed; then return to copper the one that has been delayed by the cold.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation of the text line by line in English:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	"And also consider the needles used for piercing sorceles, and they are of yellow brass, iron, or silver, and those that are made of yellow metal are more proven by weight to encircle the fistulous cavities."
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	"And they are three ways: big, small, and tiny, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures."
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of scabs are like those of hair, so that you see: long, short and small ones; and there are also patches which have .ij. corbeures (corbings) in .iij. ways.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if they have .iij. corbeures and are also in .iij. ways; and if they have .ij. corbeures, and scabs of a single corbings, and are in .iij. ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The chief of these things to be done are sharp, and of such I have who do not cut but on one side, that we peel the skin so that the vein or nerve is not cut.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these things are the alems made in many, so that the patient does not lose them with the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three ways: great, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use but in one place of the bone, as legs, arms, breast, and shoulders, and similar things;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and there is no other instrument small, resembling to scalds of fists, according to this form, in order that one does not burn himself:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it not at all at the place which heals with ease of veins and arteries, and never in this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No one should ever fill the breasts of certain men when they want to corrupt themselves, until they look like breasts of women.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain and swell up, and those who want to cure them should do so according to this form of the chapter from line b above: until:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with char, then join the 19 lips of the wound together with a stitch, and cure it until it is well;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and let the breast fall down, and is softened by its grandeur so that it looks like a woman's, if made in 19 ribs above, by 19 similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	for where the one is held by the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the greater line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. as far as line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then peel the skin that is between the lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and anything necessary for the treatment, until he is well;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not well, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the occurrence of blood, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the residue and fat are wet, then apply the treatment until he is well.
des apostemes des asselles	of the asses
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Of the asses are dealt with scrofulous nodules that come out of the skin, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the aposteme are empty, if you employ the wound with cotton wool, and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of leprosy, if you cut it as we have said in the treatment of leprosy, and if the wound runs down, apply cauterization as we have said above.
de la routure de l’artere	of the artery burst
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery bursts and the skin is tighten up above it, many times an abscess forms, and also it comes to the escaped vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you see it on time before it is for the artery, if it is a long abscess completely perfect;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on your two sides, if it is extraction; and when it is for a vein, if it is for reasons of appearance;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and this is madness to cut this abscess, and most of all when it is dislocated at the armpit and at the throat and in other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the use of iron in this case, and that which is at the top should also be avoided, and in that which is inflamed by an artery, cut through the skin from above;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	Then work on the stomach like a snake, and carefully separate the artery from the mesentery, until it is completely exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	and then draw out the needle, and pierce it all the way to the other side of the flesh, and remove the artery with a double thread of thread in .ij. lews according to what I have taught you in the extraction of .ij. arteries that are in temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	and then cut off the leu that is between the .ij. lings of an intromissioire as long as there is a hole in it, and make the aposteme;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	and then place the cure that was in the bow, as long as the lien cries;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply the ointment that comes to this one, as long as he is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is near the spine, then you should have your arm tied up so that you can't move it and you can't feel the skin around the abscess.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then fill the needle with the thread on the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then wrap a strip of cloth around it, as I told you before, with one end of the thread tied to one edge of the cloth and the other end to the other edge;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is secure, then put another needle on one end of the thread at the incision made by the first needle, and stretch the threads in three directions;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	and then cut the abscess as much as the excess fluid drains, then cut off the excess skin and leave those tied up;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then cover it with a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil, and then administer treatments of herbs and onions until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses from the nails
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, the abscesses come from the nail and the vein, they come from the nails when they are broken, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And that is often in the joints of shoulders and arms, and this is what is called an abscess, and its color seems to be the color of the flesh, and it is in many conditions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	And when they are put back into place, if the patient feels pain, and it is not completely healed by the flesh, but stops the cure.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	And it must be well sealed on all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who is in the joints should not cover with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin with chisels.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, if he has a nail, and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, if the suspender has a nail, and cut it, then scorch it, then the bone and join the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	hanging large balls
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No times comes in bellies and no other part thelull, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance of wet, and is the subtle root, and the big tree; and there are small and large ones;
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw .i. home who had .ij. or stomachs which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were split open, and ran together with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I took them and found in one 1600 grams in weight, and in the other 520 grams, and the extractions from the incision were such that if you look at the patient's color, it is moist and white, and the root is thin;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if it is large, and they are in your presence, the fire cautery comes again and again too much blood loss, and it leaves him without you, so hurry up then cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient anticipating and afraid of the incision with fire, then take 1 well-made piece of twine, and bind the articol as we have said, and leave it for 1 day;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then the restraint, and do not cease to pull out the hair thread as long as it grasps the arteil, and try by him the work; and if the roots are thick, so fear for the copp at once for the belly, but you make it well copp half.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and keep you do not copp the thistle which is of foxy color and poor taste and of milky milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess encrusted, and I will come to the cure of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the milk is strong
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the boil comes by a cautery from a wound or a cut of the syrup, and it is on the belly and in some of the boils, as it happens in other wounds, or of blood which comes out of veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If it is by the cut of the syrup and by the issue of the boil, if its color is similar to that of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it at its two extremities so that it repents, and then comes back, and perhaps if it is tight, and grows larger at the entrance to the bath and because of great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is by blood, then open it according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it's because of windiness, if it's at the base of the neck, and the opening if it is that you observe that its appearance is due to blood from an artery, or a vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is appropriate that you leave the cure. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before, or a paste of abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the bile, if it is appropriate that you command to the patient that he dyes his hair, and be all right, then sign of both sides the belly;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to turn himself between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	and then go to the place you have tied up all the sputum.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then raise half of the abscess at the top to the whole great hook;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	and then tie it with a strong thread or a piece of sturdy silk, and make it secure;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then extend half of the abscess on the thread, and dip your index finger in it, and feel the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you have been struck by an arrow, if it has lodged, draw out the arrow towards the back of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, if it takes hold, cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery hurts or bleeds, then go inside and take 12 feathers, and tie them together, and cut off the ends so that you have 12 threads, and tie them around what you have pierced, so that you can pull it out.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the appendix out over the feathers, and if you see it, cut off the feathers, and leave it there until it has bled dry, and then remove it.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	and here is the first line translated into English:
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the joint with what is right, and bind the joint.
dou chancre	and here is the translated text:
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	and here is the translated text:
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the treatment, when it is in place where it can be removed, as we have said, is to purge the disease of black bile; then make him healthy if he has manifest fulness, and then afflux the disease .i. good place for making the treatment; then pour your leechings or chancre, and hair all over, and the bone all over without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely everywhere, and squeeze the place in your hand or anything, and if the blood runs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if it is cauterized until the sinews are stiffened; then cure it with other remedies until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have said in the division the appearances of dropsy, and how the accumulation of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the treatment that is performed with medicines, and that which is cured with iron: it is only to be touched by iron in these  .ij. appearances: namely, tympanites and hypoglycaemia, for it is a deadly thing; so when you treat this appearance of dropsy which is called "ecetes" from medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see the patient is weak, or he has another disease besides dropsy, as we have said, and solution of the stomach and similar things; if there is no doubt, and the patient seems of strong virtue, and he is not too old nor too young, then you should do so:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Lie the disease right on your hands, and the minister press the belly at the bottom of the pis by pouring water there, then take the spatumile with thorns according to this form: And they are sharpened from both sides, so that it is not so deep as to come up to the intestine when you put them in, and do not hurt them.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe if there is a drop of water running toward the intestines: if it is, then cut from the back of the boudel of 13 pieces right at the knuckle; and if the droplet runs because of liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the boudel of 13 pieces; and if it is from the mucus, then cut to the right, and it is not necessary that the patient lie down on the cut so that the excess does not run into the weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and hold your hand to all the spatumile between the skin and the syfac as well as by scraping to the quantity of a fingernail or more; then pierce the syfac until the spatumile comes out to the surface, and then draw it back, and pour out this instrument which has the form: And it is similar to an silver hook, and it is made of brass or light copper, and has 1 part at one end, 3 parts on one side, and 2 on the other, and the head is cut like a feather, and this is the form of the incision where the scribes cut the feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top of it is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes out to the water, then draw it back now on the instrument; empty then half or one-third of it, for if you empty more than it is necessary in this hour, perhaps the disease dies because of the loss of its spirit by the weapon, or it shakes, or approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but in proportion to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the malady mean, and his hairs; then try the instrument and retain the sharp, and it is retained now for the key which closes the aperture which is on the face, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then start again the instrument the other day, if you see the patient suffering this, and try with the sharp a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do not do it any day, and keep yourself from going into too much detail as long as it does not take more than a little water. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave out a little water, so that the cure of the grave or sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and tans him with drink; and the cure of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the virgo
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	None of the times born child who do not have a pertus in the verge, or if the pertus is small, or it is not in its place. If it comes soon that it does not pierce at all. Take very thin spatumil according to this form: then put there a very thin clump of lint, and tie it and keep it for 15 days or 20; and when he wants to urinate, if he is osted the clump, make him urinate, and then release him; and maybe he will not notice at all, because the urine that comes furiously does not leave his close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of this operation is that the patient lies down on his back, then the base of the scrotum and the penis are as long as a feather; so if the hernia bursts in the middle, as it should, and take care not to cause an evacuation of blood which comes often, and if it does, let the one who stops the blood stop it, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times come cysts in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly character; and there are malicious and non-malicious ones; so that you should take them with one hand gently, and wash them and scrape them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure with oil of vitriol until they are healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the albath is evil, of a putrid color and depraved, it is necessary that you bring it fire cautery. When you have burned it, and the albath is in the root, and part within the hair and part away, then it is necessary that you take out the albath which is within first; and when it is sewed up, then cure it. For when you cure it together, if it is not assured the roots of the hair that they do not perforate, then blackness and corruption come into its roots and where coition is; so it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then lie on the plaster of honey and flour which is made of the bark of pomegranates and dates, and then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the fever breaks out, it is necessary that you bring the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauterizations help the 2. dispositions together: that is to say, at the outbreak of the fever and corruption; and if the roots of the scrotum are corrupt and retracted, then it is necessary that you cut or conduct from the root of the scrotum a cord of rush, and make the patient urinate; and since the hair has grown on the head of the root which has been to those who have not yet been circumcised, or where there is an injury or an abscess, then it is necessary that you skin it with 1. instrument chisel, until the bonds are loosened, and the roots of the scrotum are free;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is a difficult thing to devise this, then it is necessary that you skin it with 1. instrument chisel from the top of the root and the hair; then loosen them well between 2., and put 1. thin cloth of linen soaked in cold water, so that it does not burn again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not a problem of continuous healing if it is like the other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and especially on children, we must do it with the most delicate and light-hearted manner possible for the sake of salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcision for their children, because they do not use it in their laws, and we have only come across it through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have heard the most skilled and renowned masters who practiced circumcision around the world, and in many places; so it is that I ask, for there are .ij. folds, and perhaps if one does not perform it correctly, the wound may heal properly.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is delayed, and the pain is doubled, and with the purification which comes from the blood there is no assurance of the point of the member; and the purification of the nail by accident escapes the iron, and corrects the work, and often happens so that there is no need for purification and I want it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is made as quickly as all the limb I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the quickness cuts just as well as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly throughout; but may the thread be well-stretched around the skin; and may the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you only tie the thread around the shaft so tightly, and then let it rest in all the ways that you can; and
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and then hold your hand straight between your hands, and pull the forces together between your hands or your toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the shaft and blow or kiss, and turn it upside down as much as the shoulder of the shaft is; then purify it well of the dirt which is gathered there, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it to 2.i. other threads by the second lieure at the knuckle and the little finger, and cope between the 2.i. threads, then lift the thread carefully from hospital; and turn the head of the shaft.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let the blood run little by little, for it is the lifeblood; and put powder on top of the powder. i. a cloth is dried with one degree of wheat flour cooked with water rose distilled from rosewater, seasoned with good oil and fresh herbs, and left until the next day, and other treatments are made as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the body changes due to this treatment: the shoulders are soft and flexible, and they are also equal in width.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of the purification is when the blood flows out through the incision; therefore, you must extend it to your nail, so that the head makes an absece; and then he equalizes it, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, you will hold it with pliers, and then you will equalize it.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it is three days, and that which is in the verge is inflamed, if he leaves until the absece head is calm, and the burn lightly; if you can move it, and keep away from the part of the verge, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the powder of things that are soudant wound, which we have said to be a treatment for powders, and if it is applied more than necessary, it goes up, so it does no harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	Dou retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	For the retention of urine is due to a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things, which we have said in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not passed, and you see the retention for the stone at the base or neck of the bladder, so that the patient is bent on his knees; and if the stone is placed on the back, extend the patient's stomach from above the back, and restrain the patient to lie down as much as he can; and then forces the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that the urine is passed.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so you need to bring extraction with all the instrument that is called 'syringe', which is the form: and let it be of fine light silver, as the feathers of an owl; and let the cane be a palm long and a half, and make it fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the way of the issue of urine is that you take .i. double thread, and tie to the end .i. little of wool or cotton, and bottle the end of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the surplus of the wool and bottle it up to the end of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and massage the bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then lightly insert the syringe into the penis, as far as it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the bulb; then bottle the syringe before up to the bladder, and let it come out with the urine, and this is not done except according to this order unless the patient turns it; then draw the thread all around the little pouch, and the urine follows the pouch, then remove it by force, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and restart the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and keep the patient calm.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or sores come in the bladder, or if it is inflamed, then you should distil water and medicine, if done to all the instrument which is called “clepsydra”, and this is the form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it is 1.3 perches: 1. part on one side, and 1. part on the other, as you see; and let the cheveux of the medicine be such that it stops well the stem without addition, so that we can draw the moisture, and pour when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see how to move your medicines in the bladder, put the chief of the medicine in the moisture, and pour it while moving, which will move the moisture to the chief, and then pour it firmly again; if it enters the moisture inside, and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the delicate cyst which we use to cyst the bladder: if so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or archant, and the shoulder blade higher; and desoz at the .i. breast or the liiens chiet; then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture which you see to cyst the bladder, then lie between the .ij. breasts formed of a good double thread, and heat .i. poc that moisture on fire; then bottle the head of the cyst in the penis, then draw your hand over the bladder all the way up to the moisture coming out little by little, until the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make 1 a circle, and pierce it roundly; then bottle 1 strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as one puts together 1 a dal, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; and do so as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	Nos avons ja dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l'extraction ensemble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as reins, et toz les signes, et en que piere on doit ovir de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai ouvertement et briement.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I said that the stone that is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the fluid jumps from the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and I open it, and massage the patient's penis, and stroke it many times, and then tighten it; and its foundations are destroyed; and the healing of the children is light until they are .iiij. years old, and it is heavy in the elders, and it is weak in those who are between juvenile and elderly; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient by enema, in order to draw out all the matter that is in the bowels. For it never causes trouble to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and stand him up and move him to the left, so that the stone comes out at the top of the bladder completely; then make him sit with his hands on his knees, and his legs open wide, so that the bladder is all turned towards the ground; then seek it and touch it;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder in his right hand, and he orders that he extends in his right hand the testicles up, and with his left hand he lifts the skin which is outside the testicles in the part where one makes the cut; then I pour the sputum copiously, from where it is this form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And open between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left leg; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two fingers are close to the foundation, and let the cut be wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Then open between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the side of the left leg; and let it be right on top of the stone, and your two fingers are close to the foundation, and let the cut be wide from behind, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; by chance if you press so that the two fingers are where the foundation is, that they should not go without work; and know that there is a part of the stone or angles, and margins: it is gray going up; and if it is part that is underneath, resembling a bead, and round, of which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	A certain cell where there are angles and margins, make the size larger; and if it does not come out, so that you extract it with pliers which are like a chisel at the top, to prevent it from escaping; or you take a very sharp instrument curved at the tip; and if you cannot engage it in this way, then open it a little more with a blunt instrument, and if it is peeled off, then extract it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there is more than one stone, first bring out the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then press hard, and the smaller ones afterward if there are any. And if it is very large, so that it is convenient to make a larger wound; for two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out through the hole where the flesh does not close; but you must try to extract it piece by piece with pliers or a chisel, as long as you extract it.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have finished your work, if you employ the wound with ointment and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it, and put thereon a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then remove the bandage from the patient's neck after three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the bandage, if it is well oiled with oil and water, then clean the wound with daphnicon ointment and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and blood-clots in the bladder, and is kept back by this so that it does not jump with urine: then you should put them into the wound, and extract this blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and it will putrefy.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	then lift the wound with water and mud and rope, and help it in all ways that you can until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the time that you cure it, you tie the two legs together, and apply the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is placed in the urinary canal, and it is stuck, and urine cannot come out; then you should cut it many times with this cure that I have just said, so that it is excised from the size of the cut. I have already tried this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take 1/3 of iron according to this form and be 1/3 of the angles fixed in 1/2 a twig:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	and take .i. a piece of wood and lay it between the testicles and the stone so that it cannot go back into the bladder; then insert the wood lightly into the scrotum until it comes to the stone; and bring the wood back to your hand little by little in the stone until you can pierce the stone from the other side; and soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what is delayed from the stone that is inside the scrotum. If it is so soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and is relieved of the patient's pain;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this for any reason that harms it, then take 2 pieces of wood and stick one on top of the other, then lay the scrotum between them; then remove it forcefully, and untie the thread and wash the frozen blood that is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	if the stone is present in women, and if it has never been there before, then one thing is that perhaps the woman is virgin; and another is that we cannot find a wise woman who knows how to treat it by hand, even if she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third mode is that by chance one cannot find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth mode is that the stone of the woman is more perfect than the stone of the man, because it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity dictates, if you press a woman who is very well-versed, and in which you do not find, then cast an eye on this one: a woman who knows a little of the art; and present to him a good lady well versed in life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to make that you command from the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and see well if that woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to put out his little finger or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then she binds her little finger, and he recommends that she put out her little finger with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder formed.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then she binds her little finger, and he recommends that she put out her little finger with the disease, and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder formed. If she has found the stone, if she moves it strongly at the entrance of the bladder until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut over the stone in the root of the thigh where the hair grows, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her little finger over the stone or off, and let him have a small size.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	and if it does not go out, then put white vitriol on it, and keep it for an hour until the wound is clean; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the tools that I told you in the extraction of the stone at hand to help you with your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if the stone comes out, and it is of the artery that has broken off, then put the powder on the top and strain the blood and lactic fluid, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not extract it except by chance, and then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the loins have relaxed, then return to your work, until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	of hernia
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramie is so weak that it comes from the testicles and is spread out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And it never comes from the percussion on the testicles, and this moisture is often of different colors: or it is a declining yellow, or without red, or black, or white water, and such happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of this assembly, for if it is as white as we have said, then the abscess is shallow, that is, short and as the shape of an arrow; and does not open the blisters, because it is wet all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then the abscess is shallow with part of the arrow, and because of this one thinks that it is another arrow;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white clearly, then it smells good; so, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all around it because its shape is as described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	And according to what comes after the joint, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure with fire, it is fitting that the patient should be made well according to his power and the fulfillment of his body; then let him lie on his back, on a low thing, and cover him with many sheets.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then let him sit on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on his right, and stretch the stick at one of the two ribs at the cure of the lungs;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the stick lit, and peel the skin of the lungs among them all along until the end of the knuckle, and cut it with a straight slash while peeling the skin of the lungs carefully according to his power;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the plain of water at 1.5 large holes, and extract all the water, and then put your fingers in, and close the hole up; and do not touch the skin of the lungs, but only peel it yourself; cut off piece by piece carefully the skin from him, so that if you do not peel it well, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the feather falls to your work, if you set it in its place when you have completed the work of medicine; then join the .ij. limbs from the knees to a seam, and heal it as you would other wounds until it is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the feather corrupted by another disease, if it is necessary that you hold the suspenders, in doubt of the decay of blood; then cut the joint to all the suspender, and extract the feather, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the aiguille is assembled into two parts together, knowing that there are two branches; then cut the other part as you did the first, making it even, and wash the blood, and put in another wound wet with oil rosin.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put there another wool wet with wine and oil, and put on the 2 joints, and put over double sheets, and lay it down on all the thread which is according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take .ii. drapelets, and employ the woollen cloth according to this appearance, and let them be sewed together by means of a seam in the girdle of the breeches, and one of the shoulders should press upon the fundament down to the back, and the other at the part of the hand; and that other two chins upon the .ii. angles, and may all be assembled into the loop of the breeches.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never use the knife of cautery in place of a iron one, and it is that you press 1. cautery scalfice subtil, and cut the leather of the shoes, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white medicine which contains the water may come to light;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	so take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white medicine with it like a bird, and dry it out by means of that scalfice cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all the ways that you can, until you have dried out everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the fat; and know that this work is more safe; and keep from corruption of blood, and make sure that the works of cutting are done well;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if anything makes you contrary, or an abscess of blood or other thing, if the cure is opposite to it, according to what is before said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and will not wait for this operation because of its horror, so make a puncture, as I have said, and it is that when you are sure by the signs which we have said that the water-remedy is alive,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Then sit the patient on a high bench; then pierce the abscess at the base all along the broad part of the jaw, and place the puncture at the long hole in the chest; and make the perforation wide so that all the water can run.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the hole, and tie it, and let the rest of the water run out, then heal the wound until the sore is well.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if the stain does not let the water go out of the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you put a feather or an instrument with which one treats the water from the hydropses there; for its form is as follows: and open .i. little the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 1 month or more, and when it is gathered so as before, and thus the sick person will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this chapter on pain there are many considerations, for it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the appearances of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from the heart, and most commonly from the joints; and this is due to chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This is to be understood: by means of bitter and sharp moisture, which is expanded in the joints, or by impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the heart; and it does not cause pain, but is a grievous abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	And sometimes it is a grievous and painful abscess, of fierce color, and never comes from the artery or the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is an artery, if it is contracted by the arrangement of an abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not necessary that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	The wound made by the piercing of a needle is contracted by its arrangement with the touching of the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and it can do well to make the incision on this appearance and on the other characters;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and so you chop the cur of the cow, then hang the liver high, and the truffle white as medicine, and free the suspender from all parts of the liver.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	Now that the liver is already sodden with these new ingredients, it is therefore necessary that you take the liver and the cur.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is fresh, or in that which is within the bags, it is necessary that you deliver all of it, and chop it well.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the cur is behind, it is necessary that you chop it all, and extract the liver, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are done, wrap the wound in wet wool, oil and wine, and then cure it with other remedies until it is well.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapper-like appearance, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient groans with pain when he moves;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the cure for this disease is well prepared with fear as before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you how to work on it, according to what the old one did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you sit the sick person on .i. a soft seat, and then pour the poultice liquid down their throat from both sides,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessel that are near to the penis, and wet them with the master liquid, and extend them out.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	Then chop with a sharp spatula from the top down over the vessels, until they are all uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then peel each part off, as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then take an awl or it has .i. double thread, and tie it to the first loop where it came into view, and then quickly to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then chop them in the middle correctly, according to the length of the body, and cut out the corrumptous moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with others where a bow is shot, so that no vessel hits either of the balls;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For if it comes from nowhere, and all the vessels come out, then you must pull the balls from all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the wound does not lose its moisture because of the incisions of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	"And this tear is either due to sectioning or to external application on the abdomen, and these two ways of causing pain are: by beating, jumping, braying, or lifting heavy things, and similar actions;"
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	"And the signs when it is due to external application on the ribs, are that it happens little by little over a long period of time and does not suddenly occur;"
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	"And the rib bones are even up to the very end, so that the tear does not cause the intestine to separate."
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the physician, that she brings about sudden painful trouble, and are the abscesses different appearances, separating the skin, and this for the issue of the intestine and the body away from the physician.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never does it separate with the intestine, and is held in, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these cures of iron, for fear of it coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of this work is that you command to the patient that he keep the intestine in his hand within the wound, if it can be re-entered;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	Then have him sit with his head between your hands, and loosen the hair.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then cut off all of the skin from the top,
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then bottle up the essence of the oil of the skin according to what you need to open the wound, and be such that it can easily come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel off the skin, scraping all the way down until the blisters appear;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	and place your two fingers in the opening of the crotch, between the white skin which is behind the scrotum and between the second skin.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and depart what is behind the scrotum and between the second skin; and then move to the palm of your right hand into the crotch opening, and hold the white skin on top of your left hand, and bring the scrotum up against all the skin around the groin.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch out the scrotum upwards, and pull back what is above the anus.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and look with your two fingers if there is any hard or white skin wrapped around the intestine, and if you find nothing, pour it into the gut.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	And take a needle where it has .i. thick thread made of .x. threads, and the bottle in the back part dou sic, which is after the skin of the coins; after the size, then cut the heads that appear from the thread, as long as there are .iiij. threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	and then assemble one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and bind sic where we have said that is removed from the skin of the coins, with a strong thread of 2 parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	and then wrap the heads of the thread and bind them together with 2 parts, so that no one of the vassals who suckles them can enter the ears, so that an abscess does not come up;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and then put the thread on according to the first long thread of 2 parts, and after these 2 threads leave sic where the skin is removed from the coins, which is large for one part;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and then all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; and chop in the part which is outside the skin of the eggs, until it stops running, and the bow, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	and then introduce the moist wool in oil, and put on the wound, and put the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is cauterized with the white salt that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leaves the thread as long as it sews itself; and if it delays to sew, so let it be raised with hot water, and put on that we have said, as long as it sews itself; and then:
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and then treat the wound with another treatment until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone attempt to make a cure for hernia with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancient ones said that it is made in this way, as if you tie the vassels together, after cutting on a light and lightly; and tu mettras le li sur un bois, ou il est par temps sec et sans vent.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then cut off the appendage, and cure the abscess for those who have it, as long as they are still alive; and cure it as we have said, until they are well.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No time comes when there is a rupture in the bowels, as we have said, and open them; and do not remove any of the bowels to the outside, and if any are removed, it is little, and repair every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and wherever he stays too much in this place, if the wound or syphilis believes him, as long as the intestines are removed;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and where there is a stretching of the syphilis that is in the bowels, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then it softens and dilates the intestines and opens them;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and he is healed by cautery, as we have said above; and he is never healed by iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then place the fire cautery over the edge of the wound according to the quantity of .ii. two;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then remove the skin that is separated from the flesh, and then take the hair and place it on the edge of the skin;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and then press it perfectly to the belly, and cut the .ii. inches of skin that is on the edge of the hair, and cut the two;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then remove the head from the root, and do not cover with any medicine or extend the blade in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the ramose intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And then he heals by healing wounds. And when you cover the fibers, if the wound and the healing are good, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The medicine must be kept in place, and does not have a visible appearance in the incision; and the cauterization is wet in this spot, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the joints
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Maitre de la cauterisation par le feu, enseigne au patient à laisser pousser les poils jusqu'à ce qu'ils soient longs et égaux; et s'il les gratte à leur base, maintenez-les immobiles jusqu'à ce qu'ils poussent.
dou chastrement	Voici la traduction du texte en anglais :
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I will translate the provided text into English:
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Here is the translation of the text:
de la tentigene	of the tenticle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the text:
de erratique	of irregularity
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	de erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n'est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c'est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l'enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connaissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S'il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu'il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l'oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines stainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d'uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d'autres cures tant qu'il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n'est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l'aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.
des emorroides	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Emorroids are openings in the veins which, without surgery, and when the emorroids are old, they become thulles; and we have said in the division the appearances of the anus, and the signs, and I will say here those who receive cure. I say that the emorroids and the thulle, when they are completely inside the buttocks, and it is not felt unless it is cured by iron. Those who are at the mouth of the buttocks can be felt, and they can be cured. Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold room, then tie the thulle to the clasps, and powder in restraining medications, if possible, and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour his feet on the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if it comes out, let her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and scabs and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit with honey and easily, and make .i. plasters on his back. And if it dries up, it is good. If not, have the ventouses put on her back and the mamelles without hurting; then take another, and squeeze it into juice of plantain or blackcurrant juice with old wine, and make it come to the place. And when the abscess stops, let the place be oiled until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a .i. rough head, if it should be covered as I have said about the thulle; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the buttocks
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Here is the next sentence translated into English:
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	of childbirth
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with a groan, and the virtue of her is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women support her; and pour a little oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the midwifery between her two knees, this being the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If the baby comes out by its own natural power, and the woman gives birth with a groan, and the virtue of her is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, or have women support her; and pour a little oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then put the midwifery between her two knees, this being the form:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the issue of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the baby comes out from between its legs, then you should lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it over and over until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and then rub. And when you have done this, then stretch it out and rub it over and over again.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	And as soon as they jump, if they are instructed to vibrate, and this is done by making it shake with cold.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If they jump, let them see God.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not work as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is in accordance with natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have said, take musk of the earth, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind them all together in a mortar:
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the woman's natural secretions, and spread this ointment:
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then let her sit in an lukewarm bath until she is completely wet;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is thoroughly wet, she is given a necklace of myrrh, and it is put on her, and she is left for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then set it on a seat, then make it shake and hold its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, for the child does not weigh much now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child is in this condition, if I put my hands on its belly gently and repeatedly:
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then it is tied to its neck, and its feet hang down, and it lies on a bed:
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he folds his hands slowly and then he presses them on his belly, and he draws out the bowels until they are all outside.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the patient doesn't sneeze, if he takes his feet and moves his body, then he raises his belly, then he puts your hands down;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and the child slowly; and instruct the woman to kneel until the baby comes;
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, if one makes the woman stand up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, if you make her lie down on her side, and raise her legs slightly.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then introduce the muscle tension that I have described.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it does not give birth, then take care not to place your hand on it;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and the child according to its natural form, and make it sway, and command that it stretch itself as much as the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on its neck, and has spread its hands, and its face turns towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	So that the dance holds its hand, then turns it slowly, and lightens it gradually;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, put it on the muscular nature of ale and oil, as we have said, then order that it move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the fire sit on .i. place, and order that it shrivel; and the fire will shake.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this way to all the second part, if you rub the second hand on your nail, as long as the moisture is empty;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he falls on his face and on his neck, so that the cup of wine is spilled, so that it is not held, and the man dies;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then pour the child in, until you have put him in as it should be, and command the woman that she does not weep once:
adonques si istra legierement.	then gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins' birth.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born many times, but not once or twice; and this is not a strange thing, and does not often happen.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are a strange thing, and do not live much, if at all.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they may be multiplied, and are devised by the doctor who devises them, who is tied to the boudelle.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and not once or twice do they naturally come like all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if there is a grating sound, if the treatment is as we have said, and let the ball be subtle, and quickly and lightly do what it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and make it as it should for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No one is formed except in the marriage of .i. or .ii. or .iii. or .iv. or .v. or .vi. or .vii., and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and he knows all things, for in similar things there is doubt.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if you make it as what he says.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose child has died or her womb is empty, as I said in the division, and she does not conceive again, and you are compelled to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	If it is necessary for you to know that her woman is of sound virtue, and has not experienced any accidents or fears of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	If it is necessary for you to know that the woman is lying on her back, with her feet lowered and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife should hold her at the chest, or she will lie in bed so that she is treated with the birth of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	Then massage her mouth with moist oil made from almond and fenugreek seeds and flax seed, then oil her hands with these oils and these ointments.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then bottle up in the light, then want. i. him or her bottle the onions that are suitable for this,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care so that he is properly dressed, so that it hangs down over his head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	so file the onions into his eyes or his neck or his throat or his palate or his tonsils or near his cheekbones, or at the back of his throat;
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and then they hang down over his feet, they file or pinch and touch his toes;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and let the patient dye the cloth on his right hand, and place the sponge between the two of his left hand, and lightly dip the cloth into all these places until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	This is the form of the cloth.
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then put another oncine there, where you need it, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then make it even by moving it from one side to the other, so that the claws come out, and the claws hold it in place, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part of it remains, if he applies oil to some of its two sides and fills that part with it, and draws the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if none of it remains, let him set this ointment or more high up and do so often as it comes out all over.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot bring it back due to the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then cover it with a cloth until it stops coming out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	And then wrap it up in the joint of the foot or at the ankle, and so you must do with the other hand, and for .ij. feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	If the child is large and obstructed in the passage, or has an acute angle gathered together,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then you must put the spatemile with thorns between your two hands, and push it forward and pull out the acute one;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you must wrap it in the instrument which is called "almidah", from which the form comes with the instruments or chapistry which comes after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus make him fall by nature's own power;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then try to pull out the bones with tweezers,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then cut off the head and pull it out by force, if it still moves, until all the moisture is gone;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot be pulled out, then cut it into small pieces with a knife so that you can remove it;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or seizes the ribs, then you must pierce them while the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if it seizes him on his feet, if is a light traction, and the rehabilitation to the mouth of the foot is simple.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	and if it is dislocated in the belly or in the leg, then you must extract it with the cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and if it is dislocated in the belly or in the leg, while the moisture that is running;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other member is broken, and the shoulder remains immobile,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if he cuts off his hand completely from the arm, and draws it out at the elbow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he should draw a line on the skin with his finger, and cut there;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the arm is constricted by an abscess that has come out, then it should not be worked;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	a means of dealing with moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and it is prepared with vinegar, and chopped up in water that is both salt and sour.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And it is put on the skin, and you may then make it even, and apply to it what we have said about the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one does not have power, so let him cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second;
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring him who has said to us in the aphes that they come in the mareis;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if the blood flow comes, so he is restrained in water, and others are brought him.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had a child killed, then she consults another, and refuses to kill the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the twenty aphes in the bouilloire, and it began to boil, and caused great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat, and I thought long, and I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and in it I placed a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for where there is no bone, the belly does not ache.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I would like to place the wound, and with two hands, until the woman was much improved;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and wait for the woman a long time, and he was set back a little bow in place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not remembered this chapter before but that, when the master tries a strange thing, he knows how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the bride to her bed
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the corners should be thinner than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the horn should be 1 2/3 inches wide, and the margin of the tree 1 inch wide, and a palm long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the two limbs of this horn should be joined by a joint that is 1 palm long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two supports are pressed to the mouth of the mare by opening when they turn .ij. horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another shape, its appearance more subtle and lighter, should be made of oak or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has .ij. supports and .ij. brackets, as you see, of a palm long and .ij. wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the mare opened to all the instrument, if sitting well the woman on 1 bed, with the legs hanging and the feet out;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	Then bottle up the .ij. ajostemens ajostez them together in the marris, and hold the chief of the instrument desoz between his cuisses;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Then operate your hand on all the instrument, as you have made them evenly, according to the quantity that you perceive opening the mouth of the marris, until the ball makes what it should.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted, and has many uses; and when you see them prepared, the more quickly you work, and the higher you raise them for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is coming, it is necessary that you command to the disease that she keep her tongue, and then make it sneeze, and keep your hands away from her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she does not do so, she will die.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If she does not do so, she will sneeze, or spit, and put herbs in her mouth that can open the mouth of the sick person, as thyme, Rue, Anise, Chamomile, Cassialine and Centaire.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a hook or a stick in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the sick person,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and scabies as long as the fumes come into the marrow; then make it shake, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If it is a second attack.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command that she soak her left hand in olive oil or musk oil of althaea, and then pour [it] into the air.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and wants it again; and when she has found it, if she holds it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marrow does not break at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it is necessary to move lightly from right to left, and then pull; so he will come and dislocate himself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is dry, we have said the cure of sweating, and of smoking with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not all of what we have said, keep in mind that you do not make a mistake when pulling;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the wound, you tie him to the crotch of the woman, and then rub with oil four-fold tar;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it is not cured and left alone, it will get worse; but if it is treated, when it is cured there will be a foul smell from the stomach and head, and harm the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If one should apply suitable fumigation: no one has yet tried fuming with nettle leaves and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument by which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like the appearance of a dog, and put the thin head in the nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and are fumigations on the charcoal, and the scabies until they are exhausted, and start a new one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not had their foundations pierced, but a skilled surgeon can make an incision and cure them.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If, therefore, one pierces the foundation of this child with the knife of surgery and does not pierce it too deep, and sews up the place where he has made the incision so that it is not touched,
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put it on a different bed soaked with wine and oil, then the treatment of wound care as long as it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not return, then put a wooden pole across and leave his hands free, and let him rest while he walks in the rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And never comes the sudden stop of pain from a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to cover suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said about the wooden pole.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodation, and those that grow larger than those that come from the fundament or in the space of the .ij. parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodation is old, if it is opened and then moistened with a white or subtle powder, or
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	And these fistulas never persist; and they are known by that which comes out of it or moves from it when the patient has defecation, and sometimes in the movement of wind.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce only to the bladder, and only to half of the penis; and they reach only to the junction of the scrotum, and only to the nose tip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so, know how to recognize a fistula that penetrates to the fundament, but not that penetrates from without.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and so, stick your little finger or fundament, and stick a very fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if there is a twist, and you stick a piece of thread or a hair from a horse, as long as you feel the thread or hair in your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is no pain, gas, or sight coming out, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	"And if the fistula reaches until the bladder or until the conduit of urine, and if urine leaks out, and cannot be stopped by medication."
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	"If it is pierced only to the hip joint of the groin, then let it be set at ease up to the height;"
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	"If there is no twist and the pain at the entrance of the abdomen, then let it be set in place by gentle pressure, and do not use medication or massage;"
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas that persist there is no cure except work, and the vanity of foolish looks that interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are neither persistent nor old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced,
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and bring his legs up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour a bucket of water, or a spoon if there is a twisting, until you know where the bucket comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain in the fundament, then you must put your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	Now feel where the nerve ends; and, uncovered, feel between your thumb and the finger, so you know it's persistent;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If it does not work, it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One should always use fire to cure some, but it is difficult to do so well;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid which is made, if it is heated the fine caustic according to the width of the fistula, as said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and pour the bottle all hot in the fistula, until it comes out smoothly from the base; and do this .ij. times or .iiij., as long as you know that these hairs are burned, which are like an owl's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of tents moistened cures, until that hair comes out, and then the doctor of ointments wrapping hair and binding it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healthy, it is good. If not, otherwise cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if it is tried between, and does not pierce up to the thumb which is at the base, and on the two sides of the tent a thick covering of cloth or silk, and you see the fistula in this who sews the covering to the edge;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the cloth of the encumbrance of the fistula is sewn together and glued before the tent, and then heat after, until it comes to the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered, and it will shine; then make those cloth trees that look like an owl's feather, and there remain no more.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun goes out, and light comes between you and the work, if the fire cautery or medicinal broth.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cautery brings together 19 useful things: namely, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood and the removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then heal wet tents by drying them out or burning them, until the joints are dry, and burn the burned joints in the fire.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then heal the sore spots that have grown hard due to the harsh heat of the fire, and dry out the medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once it is healed, then it is well and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just to the foundation, and is distant from the heart, you should turn it back on its two foundations, and ask that one.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the pulse, and between iij is the towre or the syfac or chares, where it is ready to pierce, there should be only a way of betrothal and hope by the administration of one of the iii ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you can, put tendons and cure it as first:
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far with the cauterization so that you cover the foundation, and come to the outlet by the voluntary way;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	and then the doctor, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	in case he is well, or remove that covering and turn it upside down then he will find the source of his disease, or with a needle or another instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	and then examine that hair which is in the wound, as well as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	and then study how to restore the wound, and delay the fistula in the opposite part of the foundation: this will be lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there are no fistulas according to this way: and it is when you pierce the tent in the fistula, and it is or costit doulx lez lo cuire delez laou desous,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour one inch thread through it, and pierce the tent at all ends through the thread up to the top of the tent.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it persists within the margin from the foundation, then remove the thread from that pierced, so that you pierce your two or foundation margins;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and tie up the head of hair, and bring together the two shoulders together, and hold them apart from each other, and leave it a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain once, until the thread has cut between the two, and the shoulders have moved apart;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	and then heal the wound as long as it is sealed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	if the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too completely enclosed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to do this with a complete closure, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healthy again.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spikelet from which one makes a tube, if it is wet with water, is cut and trimmed;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, it should not be done in this way, because it is not right to do so; you see this clearly here:
des emorroydes	The hemorrhoids.
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are away from the fundament and at the top of the fundament; but those that are away have a little moisture, and
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then cut again where there is a little yellow water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them within the fundament, so that you command the patient to sweat by sitting in a bath, until the fundament comes out, and then they discover the fibers;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and hold it as claws, or if you hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the uncut hair is wet, take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them with your fingers, then cut them and powder them with hot powders that are in the fire's place;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as described above or with a paste of cauterization, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a burning cautery and sharp, to wash what is at the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	Then let the patient lie down, and if his blood is hot, and his pulse is rapid, let him rest for a while;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and then let you press them with your nail or tweezers and cut them off, and then cure them as we have said, until they are well, and do not fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you bring the stitch in this way: take .i. thread, and wind it onto a needle, and then pull the thread over and under the needle, and make the needle pierce from the other side, and return the .ij. pieces of thread from the other end of the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is wide; and pull the thread up, then tie the thread, and pull out the needle, and do so with all of them, and leave. i.e. in order to remove the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation. i.e. dip it in oil or wax, and put on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it for a while, and when he has finished his business, if the wound has healed, he may take care of other things, until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	but only after the foundation has been laid
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying up of the fins in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you must go to the point of a sputum or your nail the shell above, which does not let it get wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it as much as it is sodden so that it can be healed;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be sodden, then restart the rasuring more strongly than before, as much as it heals, and is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then heal until he is well.
dou fremit	he will sweat.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	is a small green thing in front of the body, and goes very well;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and there is no time when the wound does not hurt, and one can feel it all over the body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a feather from an goose, or from a strong eagle, and place that feather on the wound, until the purple ring surrounds the entire wound.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand to all the feather, until you have covered the entire wound, and place it perfectly in place, and scrape the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, make one of these with metal or iron according to this shape, and be subtle and run over it:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce it, so that you keep the two together, and press: And if you wish, cauterize the wound, as it is before or with fire of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one should make a clister of silver or brass, or of molten bronze or brass; and no one should use these small or large instruments according to the places where they are applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These, on the other hand, are used for the cure of children and those who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clister is small and large according to its width, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and I say a difficulty where the belly is bound, so that you see it, and the ribs are within pierced; and on one side has .ij. openings, and on the other .i..
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be put to medicine with a bladder of wine or parchment, and be pierced all around the small openings,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and place between each opening 1/2 space of space cloth, then bottle in these openings strong thread of twisted yarn in 10 or so around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sheep;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the tool has a strong thread in front of it, then distilate; and it is the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil of olive, or of egg yolk, or a similar thing, then pour it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	Then the ministers spread it with their two hands together as long as it is hot, then remove the oil and place the patient's legs against the wall,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine run out if it needs to, and if it sleeps all night, then that is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize for a disease of the abdomen, and the medicine runs out quickly, then continue to apply it until you are healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are at the fundament or at the abscess, then is the catheter also as small as for .i. a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the catheter that is thin on which the skin is held back:
des plaies	for wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will speak about the cures for hands and medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and because of it they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things that cause wounds are by hitting with a stone, or cutting with an sword or a dagger, or a lance or a staff or a spear, or similar things; or
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or that are made by the blows of the heart, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the breast, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; or
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder will come in my chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound appears at the top, and the bone is not broken, if you are careful it is from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is all torn and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the possibility of an abscess: if you do this quickly from the pain in the head, and it goes to the opposite part of the injured member;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and remove the patient's repletion of wine and meat that is heavy.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if it does not heal, if its meat is reduced, and does not drink wine or eat cheese;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and at the wound, if an abscess forms, wet cotton in oil and wrap it, or use wine as a styptic.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess, if it is fresh to the whole of its blood, and does not move by air, powder, which I will say a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has been moved, if it is on some herbs, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, as much as a sword's edge and similar things, and the lips cannot be joined by tenderness, if they are joined by stitching, as I will say to wounds from the navel.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to bone, and it only holds for a little while when sutured, then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large meats, as tested and baked bread, also as poultry, and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find any putrefaction of the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then chop off all of it, and burn it, and then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then tie it with a string.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if he does not benefit from it, then cauterize him.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood 2 parts; live coal 3 parts, and the powder subtly,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and the stain form, as long as it is well dried up and joins all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it unbound if it does not swell, for one should not bandage the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never use calamine powder at all, when you have not burnt the incense or the dragon's blood, but let the wound move by itself.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has moved on its own, even if it is still open, do not apply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some oil of saffron or wheat flour made with water and honey, as long as it covers the wound.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let the physician prescribe other remedies until he is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound in the throat
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	Here is the translation of the first line of text:
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is at the throat, if there is no other device to leave the wound open, and do not place anything restricting, because it harms those who have it and make them withdraw;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, because the substance of the neck is cold, and the flow of blood is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but either the medicine is cold, as hot water in mild water and mixed with oil of roses, and boiled also in mild water; ou si n’y a autre remède que de li mettre un chauz au col, et le laisser a ses sours, et li faire bonne cure.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of mine according to this way, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is great, so that the bandage does not hold it, then treat it until he is well.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and she is hairy and full of hair, so that the cut or deeper;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and the flow of blood comes, so that the darkness, and the fever, and the cauterization this craft is;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the wind is stuck in the throat, or the coughs, and the diet is kept, so that meat goes well.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if the cough is on top of the neck of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it back according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then the extraction is gradually brought forward, and is left for some days, and then the cure of onions is discarded as long as it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, so seek it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, if the tough muscle is strong for you, and those that you cannot have, leave it until the wound festers.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let the discharge be clear and regular;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter on the chapître.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If the wound is caused by a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, then observe whether the patient faints: for so the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep and the wound is fresh throughout the body, then in the first hour put on the powder, and do not bind it tightly for fear of slowing down its progress.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and keep the patient warm, and attend to the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I do not know if attractive healing, and lie .ij. times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no healing, put in the wound dry cotton to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient lie on the wound .iii times a day, or .iiii., or more often;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there is no spasm, nor a tremor of the body from heat or cold;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see such good conditions, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Treat the cancer of the breast and other cures, as long as it is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot be healed, and there is a fistula, then know that it has been treated as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a knife or a scalpel, and it is simple, or on the front or back, then know how to treat what is before you.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are exposed, then let the wound rot, and will bring about extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds and other members is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	and the rupture of the womb
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The breakdown of the abdomen is great and wide and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the great wound there escapes none of the intestines, or of the mesentery that holds them, so that the ingress of water
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the suture is more difficult, and never heals better than the small wound than the large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	so that we reset the intestines further apart, since we don't reset them from one part to another.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	for so that the intestines swell up often enough to feel the cold, so they enter more into the toes,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for so that the meat of the leg swells up often enough to feel the cold, so it stays in place more than other 19.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to 34 ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the 19 common sutures are found in the suture of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitching of the other wounds of the chest and .ij. other proper stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and likewise they are more proper with the stitching of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing of the intestine in sight,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and good thing is to treat it, this is done by one of the two ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	because of its smallness
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	because their intestines are swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or .i. moist cloth in lukewarm water only slightly,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	Here is the translation of the provided text:
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and let the intestine swell until it breaks open;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and do not tighten it, and let it swell until it bursts;
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or ale and cook them well,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	For by this the entrance is closed to few things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small hole in the wound with the instrument with which one copes with hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first cure is to moisten so that he can chop it;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	so we don't have to chop it unless there is a great need;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for splitting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut it inside the shell and do not bend it, and see the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you put it back in its natural position in its proper place:
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is in the lower abdomen,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	if you should cause the patient to lie down on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head,
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the region of the loins the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if the head and the breast are higher than the hip region,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if it ruptures the belly in one of the two regions,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if the hip region where it is dislocated is higher than the other,
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and so it is necessary to treat what I have said about great wounds and painful injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds but with this you are dressed,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and then place your hands minister pitous who covers all the wound with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of suturing.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and you must twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave two spaces at the head of the wound, and thread a needle with good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the leather with the needles from the side,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who is sozzing the leather inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and gather the 20 together dou siphac the 23 together
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then extract it from a double thread entor the needle of 20 parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and gather the 20 together of the wound ahead,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave them for two spaces, and I put another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then lay down the thread as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles fall, between fine and coarse,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the fine needles fill all the space, and the very thick ones cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	so that they are of moderate size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and do not push the needles too far from the edge of the hair and leather;
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie avant la soudure;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut off the heads of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient while he is sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put blankets or sheets over the heads of the needles to keep them in place,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is sealed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of sewing with needles is most useful for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because it requires a needle or .ij.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitch is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you join the leather and the fabric together with a strong thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have perceived these things together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if I return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the manner that one threads the thread;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put space between each stitch of the same size as a small nail;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is for the seven days of the week;
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound this honourable man had on his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was stabbed with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was from his intestines, measuring about three feet in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and this wound is inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought him back his intestine after xxiiij hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound healed after xv days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the miracle was that he did not die, and this was a wonder.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not cure it with ointment, for I am in .ii. leu where one cannot find it or any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and rub cotton wool 19 times a day on the wound, and wash it with honey water until it was well.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	or I will tell you the three proper ways to sew:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and thread it from the outside in;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When she perceives the cure of disease by right, if the head of the phallus or coast or you have swallowed the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and pierce it from another part from within until it reaches the exterior;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and he should know about this stitch so that you also sew like the furrier sews the pelts,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the phallus on one side and the other on it until the stitch is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of suturing, which is properly done by Galens
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	if it is if there is no thread, which joins the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the chiefs to the other chief in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	file an awl or needle near the Miramich chief, and pierce it only once,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the .ij. shoulders of the sick
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outer part to the inside,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as shoulders of the sick.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce the other two from the outer part to the inside, in 2 other shoulders that are opposite sides of the body;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the manner of sewing, and the most common way.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Here are the first two lines translated into English:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	"It is necessary to sew the abdomen with .ij. needles, or each one have thread."
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	"and must one needle be pushed from one side, and the other from the other, in the way of those who sew with thread."
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the navel,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	that is the suturing more painful than those of other places in the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	the assessment of the wound is such as that of the other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you find the fresh wound, so that the fire has moved it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you reset the bowel, and rub it; then put the powder on gently massaging,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the meat is moved, place any ointment that is present on it, as much as the wound;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and chop the flesh, and let the sinew be tied, and the mirror;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would with others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicines, put on, as soon as it begins to go out, cotton wisp,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it. 15 times a day until it is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in many cases, when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will not connect to the main members;
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	If it is necessary for you to soak another light object in oil of time/temperature heat, or in oil of roses,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it between the arms, and clean out the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it hurts or feels warm, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If the wine blackens and causes burning, and sometimes comes to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and the perforation inside, and know that when it is the large intestines, so it is lighter to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jeun" cannot be healed when it is torn,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is due to the shape of the veins and the subtlety of the whole body, and the nearness of its nature to that of children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound jumps from the pain, so it is set back as well as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turning towards black, that you lie the place which is black, that does not come from blood,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then hold what is between the links,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the two chains hanging from the side of the wound away from it until the extraction is complete when the hair pulls, and the wound opens.
de la routure dou boueil	about the piercing of a boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are ruptured and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore it in some places,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I have seen some honourable men wounded or slain by a lance,
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and this wound was on the right side of the abdomen,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and became infected and developed a discharge, and had wind and gas.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I could find, and did not stop until he was well, and sewed up the wound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that the disease was in his abdomen;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm, but delay in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take nails from great testicles, then join the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the nails have opened the mouth, so that it is placed on the iij. lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she extorts her mouth upwards.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he holds her head, and that way it stays put so it cannot be released,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then he puts on another bandage after in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and then he bandages the wound;
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If this is burning within the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and it can be tied with a fine thread cut from the intestines of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this thread of intestine that is completely removed,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then place at the head of this thread .i. a thin twine of flax twisted
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then put the string in the needle, and cut the intestine, and retie it in the suture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing with thread is only good according to the path of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, mostly when it is in one of the internal grooves, then there is no need for surgery, but only for subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	I know that any wound or abscess, once it has healed, is called a "fistula" universally.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most often when it is cut and sewn up.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And the fistula is according to the green seed of the plant that grows hard and white, or one does not feel pain there.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also called the horse's tail.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never clear in a jump, and sometimes thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and never pokes, and sometimes enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no cure,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	It is because of only one of these 29 causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	This is to say, namely, by the small wound or piercing.
ou por sa malice;	or due to its malignity;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because it has a hard core within, and on the lips, which does not allow them to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Where there is too much bowels.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the bowels are putrefied, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where because corruption is a way of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	For by its own property, in the late region there is late digestion, and late health, and it flees by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have also described all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I make known to you the cure for fistula, which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	I see that fistula can occur in all limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas which come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the syrup, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is part that comes to the property of the main member, and similar moves.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are great damage, and there is only work, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the light until I have said it, and you are engaged in its cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see it clearly, so take a piece of leather or iron, if the fistula is straight, if you seek it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if his fistula is twisted, so that the search for a fine hook to pull,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	For the plunges are bent due to the twistiness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if his fistula is deeply injured and you cannot well search for it with hooks,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	so that the cautery by fire goes into one of the injuries,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For the moisture is short from one hole to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then ask if there is bone or nerve, and chop it off completely,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient if he feels pain when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know for sure where it is, whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Here is the translation of the text:
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bones were broken and corroded pieces of flesh that were inside them;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until she is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and the opening of the scar should be very deep from the right place, so that you cut it perfectly, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	and I put wet medicine on it, and I bottled it up to the top of the fistula.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	as long as the medicine corrodes the excess that is retained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and I put honey in it, mixed with holy oil, as long as it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healthy with this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his eye is corrupted by the fistula, then the patch.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	For in the vein or neck where the main members are, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if his eye is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, if the king is as long as the corruption is all bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with cauterization things that are dangerous to the health as long as he is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not healed, and goes back to the same way as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	knowing that you have not come all the way here
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you discover and wait until you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and bone all the corruption, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is healthy then that is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	if not, know that the corruption is too perfect, so you can't come there;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way to cure except by nature's means;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a little rotten bone, and you can pull it at the claws,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	If the extraction is made with .i. a suitable instrument for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is only one bone, and the tract is short, do not leave any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no doubt or fear;
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If the extraction is done with ease and without pain,
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, then place upon the wound something that encourages putrefaction.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave it until the flesh around the bone is rotten.
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then the bones will come out more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it's a large bone, like a leg or thigh.
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	If you wait so long for corruption until the blackness is all bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	Then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a great deal of corruption and it comes to little more than the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	If it is suitable and can be covered all the way up to the corruption, and then treat it until it is closed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula which happened to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man aged 18 to 20 years who had a pain in his leg due to an internal cause,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	For the matter came to the leg, and was escaped by a large abscess, and had no apparent cause for opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but if it is overdone by their madness on that they open on the abscess,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and in corroding matter, and becoming a fistula, and it came to such a degree that all went out of the bowels and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many I have cured in iij. years, and there was no cure for me in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	for as long as I was called, and I saw a leg and the medicines with which it was cured,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and those who run through the cracks with great noise;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and their bodies became red when they were young, and had an orange hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I put up a tent in one of these cracks, and then searched all the cracks.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one came between the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I quickly went to one of the openings and began to dig until I uncovered part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and destroyed, and the rot extended all the way down to the bone inside;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew what kind of bone it was, and I made sure that there wasn't any other rot present, except for the one that I had already uncovered;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and it didn't heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I began, and discovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the continuous decay in the bone, and the socket, and then I took the bone, and bent over to weld the joint;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not weld the joint with my hand on the bone, and I took it all apart;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I put it back together with medicine; and he was healed and fully welded,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and do not intend to recommend the use of this remedy except for the weakness of the disease, which cannot stand it.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and from the fear of death that I have for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For with the evacuation of blood it was often, but he was completely healed, and
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and bore in place of the bone a hard core, and was of good disposition and had no harm or opposite in all, nor to air nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if his jaw is broken in any place of the chest, then it is fit to do this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take a line, and stretch it to the head of the bone which is open
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command any that he stretches upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another line of a larger size than the first line, and stretch it over the chisel which is on top of the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and set the head, so that you carry the rotten cart to the end,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the cart on top of the frame where you see the rope, so that the rope does not damage the cart;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put .I. a piece of wood or a table made of wood to support the frame so as not to damage the rotten cart;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary as much as possible to see and feel the corruption, and be also another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if his nose is corrupted, and does not open, and corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then discover the chest entirely; then put
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then tie one part of the corruption to the other with silk, and let the silk be long from the corruption; as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, so cop the joint with corrupted silk, and tie the bone or it contains from the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the continuation of the 19 joints, so there is another pain than that of copper;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if corruption is where he is pricked by the hand or by the foot, then it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but nevertheless you must question that corruption, how it hurts you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not hurt you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the chisel and threads to cover these bones are many, according to the seating of the bones and the appearance of the teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and fineness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each kind of work they need to be fitted with the right tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will teach you which tools you will need, according to the knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testamentary disposition of the manner of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if he takes the instrument with which you are skilled according to what it is suitable.
dou feu	do fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may be dislocated due to moisture or due to falling.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicine to remedy that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	it is necessary to cover that member until the place where the corruption comes.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes death or bad luck, which is greater, from the loss of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the members become black, or seem to be burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and after the blackness, then go those corrosions of member to member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and take it all over the body; if you hurry too much with the copper,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is through the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and witchety shark and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	then the corrosion is at the top of the head if it is struck, and do not give it space to come except with the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, if the cup is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes up to the arm, if the cup is at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no need for a more precise measurement of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and the corrosion comes in the first joint, if the cup comes after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if she comes where pie, so cover all pie;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if he goes up in the leg, so cover at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, so there is no other evil but to make the patient die by the fire;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way of covering or sewing the member so that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister of the two strings downstream, and another ministers the other string upstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you remove the bag that is between the .iij. strings at .i. broad spatulum, as long as the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the hood or silk, and place of each part 1. drappel linen, so that the silk does not touch the ground;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient other wound and abscess cure;
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the pain comes when you operate, then cauterize the place well.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	Or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then wrap the member in a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that there was once a man at home who had:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a darkness which seemed to be burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first in his foot, so that it stained all the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the honourable man saw the corruption, he washed his foot with copper, and was cured;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and a long time after, the corruption returned to him on his two hands, and came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put it upon things that reflect after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosion.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I say that I had no hope of reflecting the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtue of the man was weak; and he was desperate and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and wrap his copper hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have no other use but to do so for the sake of others, if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Now comes a time when the flesh is removed from the bone, and it takes so long that it makes a great assembly of bowels.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it ruptures and perforates, and the bone jumps out, and the viscera remain shut up, as our serfs do.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the leather that is above it is as soft as .i.. linings of sails.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	nor do they hurt the bone, nor the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it extends all the way to the bone completely, then it is called a "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the burn so is that you grab the burn all around, and most when it is thin, also like us drapes;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not heat it for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have promised that the leather will be heated, and the corruption is not complete,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the leather is tough like a horse's hide, if you heat it with hot water:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	regardez si ses seins sont grands, et le cou qui en est est d'un odeur puante,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	So that you see if her breasts are large, and the neck which is in them is of a foul odor: then let the Egyptian medical poultice be made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take easily, and oil, and lead white, evenly, and put to cook on .i. vase at the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take this according to your need, and make it with water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in the cauterizing of the breast, and extract the puss.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this three times, until the skin is red, and the bone is exposed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never are they clistered with water of ash.
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from a vine twig, and pour water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour it out, and clisterize it, until the breasts are well covered;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot bear it, neither can Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes.
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	If the paste is made of water and honey, and a little bit of chalk ground up.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you make it with honey and wine, so that the honey has the property to cleanse and wash,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine does so with a bit of strength.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done so, and you have pledged that the breasts are well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the cauterization causes pain in those who have it done,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and if you press an ointment of plantago, and make it with oil of roses and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cauterize it with some medicines and herbs, whose properties I have spoken of or treat with oils;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the patient has a small hole in his skin, and the cauterization cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if the expansion of a bit of iron, and put it in a tent of Egyptian oil,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Egyptian basilicon oil, until it is expanded;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so that the oil or the rinse can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the cut is higher than the eye, so that the kop or lower than it is,
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is in perfect shape, so it does not slip.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you can't cover the neck properly as you see fit,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	then arrange it in such a way that the bow runs low along the string, so that it does not slip.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is in perfect shape, so it does not slip.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the loin with a cloth as you see it,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so that the bow string comes down lightly and does not let go of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medicines that consolidate in order to put on the back;
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and be placed on a .i. drape of linen that covers all the back;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and place as many as possible of the opening on the left side i.e. a larger one at the front than at the back,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	so that it is sutured above and below i.e. another piece of cloth according to the quantity of the opening,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it on the left side in order to align the bow i.e. do not remove the large cloth before several days;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and that which is above the opening, often remove to expose the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or not enough; or indigestive or indigeatable;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take care if the patient feels pain or no pain, and if there is an abscess or not;
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when the medicine has spread in any way on the chest of the sick person, and you see the nature that rises from within the breast;
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breast is inflamed, and approach the saint;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if it changes .i. another cloth, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts become swollen after many days, know that the breasts are not inflamed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons come slowly over a long time, know that you will not perish from their poison,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the health improves. For there are men whose late healing of their wounds and those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and they vomit after many days, because their breasts are not yet dried up;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and their breasts are late in drying and are swollen, let them take medicines of dried substance mixed with moisture and made useful by being dried;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	for with great caution, for there is much lead in it, and that is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take care with precision, and make it with oil of rose, and anoint with even old wine.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then let it cook well, and add to it, and this same thing made better with honey cooked and thickened,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	for when the care is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take mirr and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it on honey as soon as it comes out of the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in a cloth, and lay it on the chest, and never administer oil or alcohol long.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the sky, which is also like flour of times and one hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in simple or compound use: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	And thus you shall know that corruption begins to spread from the bones, or hard members, or limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the doctor of the cure of the fistula, if as we have said above.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail of the toe
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is a wart that grows on the nail of the thumb of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Here is the translation of the first sentence:
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is wrapped up, and no attention is taken, then it comes .i. abscess between the toes,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and grind as much as they cut at the root of the nail, and perhaps they cut all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes the corruption up to the bone, so much that it comes with stinking pain, and the two sides of the joint are large, and the color is red.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	If it is necessary that you cut off all the excess that has been delayed from the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauterization is a great aid if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if he presses the foot hard, and begins to prick, and bleeds it,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	if you put the iron on the nail that pricks the foot,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and pour the wine up, and hold this subtle and light foot,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining foot of the wine fiery and corrosive remedies to destroy all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat with garlic until he is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then cut it and burn it, for as long as the bone is corroded, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the pus coming out, then cut it off with a knife as described above,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is well.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and bruised, and it hurts a lot, then you must first treat it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail of the little finger with a chisel from one side to the other.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the cut does not go all the way down to the nail bed, because the patient will feel a lot of pain if it does.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is something, put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the wrist of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	they will have a strong grip on the hands of some men by chance and are all flesh,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance they may have part bone and part flesh, and never have knuckles,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some people are born with the root of the joint, or their birth is at both ends.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born without a navel do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who are born with a navel may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of the one who is chubby so is light, in some way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the size of the one who is chubby so is light, in some way: taille le en sa racine d'un large spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief à curer: si te tien dou coper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In that which is born at the root of the joint, it is painful to cure: if you should chop first the round bone up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then chop the bone with an appropriate chisel; then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The two main ways in which bones come together: either by natural birth, or by the join of a wound, or by the heat of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you believe that you have this saltpeter, so that it is repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	Then place between two tents or drapes soaked in oil, so that it does not harden;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the threads are softened, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Soaking in oil is necessary for this; take that saltpeter and, as it should be, soak it in oil so that it softens.
Des vils	Of the vile things
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The evil ones are vast, wrapped in thick layers of melancholy excess, which come from many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more come in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, that at others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It therefore comes that you do not administer any cleansing of the colon, and then heal from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure of iron if it is according to .ij. manners: one is that it on the copes, and traie on fur the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another manner is that you see the vein, and trai all fur.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cut should be according to this manner: arise the first leg of the water hot very strong, until the thick blood is thin.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then strain the leg of the sick person from above the knee to the hip;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	and cut the vein in .i. place, or in .ij. or in .iij., of a wide size,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	Then cut and draw the black blood from your arm, from one hand to the other, as much as the patient can bear without fainting;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then make a poultice, and instruct him to cover himself with black meat;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the process of evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, and rest on the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	"For the treatment of the leg of the patient, first remove any hair: then dip it in water, and heat it; make the veins swell up red."
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	"And if you do not have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then place it against the hip at the ankle, or in the part between the knee and the ankle."
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	"Then soak the skin with oil, and peel the vein from each part, until it feels smooth when touched."
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it looks red and black, and when it enters or leather also seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then pour on the resin so that it is raised from the skin, and then put on the oil lightly,
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then the cope in .i. other place after it iij. do; then dry the skin on the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then let it rest at the raise, as you have done, and put on the oil to another uncinate, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	and chop another piece, or more than you need, then cut it into two pieces, and chop one of the pieces in half.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	and cut it in half, then remove it in half-inch pieces, and chop each piece in half, until it is completely removed, then chop it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then tie a strong double thread of .i.i. wire around it.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and cut and lift it, and tie a string of 100 threads, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it has completely been removed.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and let it not break, for if it breaks, neither can one pull nor lift it, and there is harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished treating it, place moist wool in wine and oil over the wound and wrap it up; and heal it until it is well.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and it is not straightened, then as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	if you split it diagonally, but do not cover it; and handle it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The form of iron which one takes care to curve so that it is not broken, and does not cut, but curves the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of large curve, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
De la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance does not happen in other parts than the legs, and that which is of the pus that comes off the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	so that it comes from within the body, serpent-like and twisting, between skin and meat.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes in the leg a great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the legs change, and the disease begins to grow from within, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is opened, if you wrap a piece of cloth around it from one Z and a half to I Z., and tie it up,
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth hanging at the leg, and every time that there is a point to move away, if the wrap around the cloth, and the new
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too far, then cut a part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cover its root entirely, until it is all wrapped up;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you cut it, then it enters into the hole, and causes apoplexy and corruption where it goes, and brings bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this thing, it is necessary that she be treated little by little up to the throat, and there remains nothing or a core.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and this vein never when it is treated with palm of long, or with X.,
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and I have ten good hands for it, which she is of X. palm long, and when you cut her, if bottle or hole, and pierce up to the font,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything comes out; and let the matter which is inside be empty, and introduce at the place healing remedies against putrefaction for a day, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never use this hand to cut with, and least of all when it is opened in the joint of the foot or the foot itself,
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and then he will have a break-up, and from which he will never recover; therefore, heal it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that are born between leather and cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	this disease is called in our land "buff disease", because it often affects buffaloes,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between leather and harness, and goes all over the body up and down.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and he smells good from one member to another, as much as he removes the leather where he goes, and jumps far.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is infected with some humor, so that they come towards him and wind and crawl and worms or eggs.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt about his malice, because when he goes through the body, and he climbs to the head, and he comes to the eyes.
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	for adventure enters, and destroys the oil; and it happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and drained, then one can only do so often as he goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So that it is convenient that you lay it on a hard place with a very tight strap,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then drag it up and down and across, and it will be perfectly even in the cart, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the fire cautery is used, until he dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it causes, if it corrupts the oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the oil, then hold back its head with one hand and cut off its tail with another;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and use the patient of mondification of קורסי של תרופות פירוטיות על מנת להסיר את הרוחות הרעות,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and to wash away the meat with a poultice.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that affects certain members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and it spreads from member to member; and I saw the one I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to attend a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and after that, he saw rise up like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	so soon as if alive silver when it cuts from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain left that place and settled in the shoulder, and it became hard, like a bone;
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it corrupts all the body, until it comes to the other side of the breast.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that she twisted again and again around her body, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how she moved her member from one part of the body to another, for I had never seen such a thing before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nonetheless, I have heard that many people have suffered great pain as their illness progressed in this way.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not want it, if I saw it in a woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that this is why the woman had a small chest, and the veins were exposed,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason does the woman's belly look tight;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and does not appear to these women who are delicious, and who have moist chests and relaxed veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you have cured this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the wound heals and does not remain open, and then bandage it up tightly where it has opened;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the wound; and if you do not see the hairs at their base,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure for this disease, such as pills of foul-smelling herbs, and pills of seraphim, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	There are different types of them, there being some with large tips, and others with small ones, and some with hair-like points, and some that are welded.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and some with .ij. corners, and some with tongues, and some with pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and which chies in any member so chies according to .ij. ways: or in a principle member chies,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as the brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she chies in any of these members, and the sign of death, which I shall tell you hereafter, appears
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	is that you should wash yourself of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after a number of preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when there is no sign of disease yet, and the arrow has not been fully removed, lead it along and cure the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	and the sign of the skull when the arrow pierces the bone, and a medical implement is placed on top of the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there is a scar, and a swelling, and an irregular shape, and redness, and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and may be there is a lack of breath through the nose or ears; and may be there is a loss of speech or voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and jumps out of the moist wound white as a pullet, and in jumping too like a burned horse;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign will reveal itself to you, if you hold it back from the cure, and follow the arrow if it is not entangled.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it points down or up is that it is near the left breast and also seems to be stuck in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and if by chance the arrow seems like a pullet, and in short black blood, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	So then you see doubt that death may come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow is that the patient does not sweat from the wound, and the throat swells, and the skin changes color, and he gasps for breath and shivers with cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters the back and causes pain and grief, and he gasps for breath, and all his limbs shake with pain.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters the stomach, perhaps it may cause an upset stomach and a foul odor to emit from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow enters the belly, and it does not go through the intestine wall, then there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow enters the bladder, and urine flows out, causing the patient to urinate frequently, and he feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is the face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and forehead and jaw and legs, and the limb resembling it, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or artery, and it does not cause vomiting, as I will tell you that happened to me, then do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	A man had an arrow in his leg or armpit at the root of the nerve.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and severed the fat of the ear from the other side, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I saw an arrow that had entered his flesh at the root of the ear fat, severed from the paper.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was removed, and I only felt a poking sensation on the skin towards the ear.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and this arrow was great of an aquamarine bow, to all .i. lighter than ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And through one arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arab to ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I knew the hawks, and I hid them as much as I could, and the Christians were healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And through one arrow to a man, who was on his back or stomach, and I thought he died;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then let him rest for .xxx. days, if his condition does not improve;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut off the arrow, and fixed it, and removed it, and did not suffer any bad accident to happen.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you have an arrow in your chest or back, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and do not change its natural position,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres natural
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, to whom he had shot an arrow into his face, and the wound was healing.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he remained there without suffering great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And he shot an arrow at a prince's king, which went through his neck,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly tilted to the right side, and the arrow was completely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat it after it had been wounded. I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I treated it with great care for a long time, and I did not feel any pain.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pain and numbness in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought this was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on Lou's plastron that atractive digestive, so that the leaks don't burst;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the arrows.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plastron right away, and quickly heal the wound, and delay the patient's suffering for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he felt the arrow. i.e. a day or two after its entry; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied to the wound an aggressive caustic medicine by hand for as long as it was open.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tested it, and felt the tip of the arrow which took root;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied to the wound by that caustic medicine, until the tip of the arrow became visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and well completed the terms within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I cut out the wound so that I took hold of the nails, and the meat from one side and the other, and I could not take it out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	Then I ceased to be subtle and to devise ways of instruments, until I took it with very good nails,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to this person who has a certain form in the end of this chapter, as I keep it coming back and healing the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And I see that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I repaired it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or have you said the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your cure on what I have not said, for the book cannot include everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters compare a few small things, and on those that are present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	try to work with nine or ten instruments, and in the dissection of strange things which come into this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows are from the limbs or they are fixed except for according to the following nine ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the place where they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and those who have pricked themselves there, it is an arrow entering into their flesh, and they have not pricked themselves there at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not prick now, let it be left until the flesh is rotten and the issue is healed;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it has entered into the bone and cannot come out, let it be left for such a long time that it causes no harm;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it pricks, and if it does not prick, let there be a small opening at all times, so that the flesh inside is stretched, and then cut;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the skull, it goes just to one of the vents of the brain.
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I said happen to the patient: if you do not pull it out, but leave it until it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if the arrow comes just to the syph, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is stuck only in the bone of the sole, and does not come to the syph,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and let the patient stay for a few days without any further harm if the device for treating the disease is used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is badly infected and cannot be removed, if you apply tar as I told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the chest if it cannot be seen, and seek it out with all your might;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, and treat it with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by the stretching of the wound, and by the deepness of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if there is no bone, nerve or vein, let the wound be as large as it needs to be;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and train the arrow if you can, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you can find the spot where the shaft is inserted into the bone, which is half the length of an arrow that you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather pull it out with great care.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at first, then rain it in, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain of the extraction contradicts you, then apply what we have said about the cure with our章
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and guard against incision of the nerve and vein, and do not comment on how you may pull out the arrow without danger,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or bake or roast, or firmly or loudly; and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow went in,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot do so, then let him do it according to what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another place, where it does not open anything, or the leather is swollen in a certain place so that it can be seen or felt:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	If it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone and broadens it out, then remove it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it there still, and then begin the extraction again as long as it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the arrow is in the bone, break it off at both ends.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if he has a fever, and you see how to administer it, then he will administer .i. the instrument will be used
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the cheveur of the instrument; and then pour out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is pierced, he will pour .i. the instrument with the point entering in, for the extraction to be easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow touches the bone, so that you can cup all the marrow where the venom is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	Then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	If an arrow or spear strikes him in the chest, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close, then you may cover it with a patch.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	And be careful not to cover the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, for this is work.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the claw-like tools used to treat arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and it should be as follows:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of doing this: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the claw-like tool at the end should be like the beak of an owl,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for the tip of the arrow, as it is here depicted:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of claws for gripping and for holding onto something like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	veins of the neck common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which one heals are .xxxii., from which there is a head xvi.,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is the translation of the provided text into English:
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries which are in the two temples appear.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the two arms of the hair, which are called "suckers".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the head;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two arteries which are in the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the .ij. veins which are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the .ij. veins which are on the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins which are commonly referred to are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the chest, and it is called by lay people "voinne du chef";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the motion is called "fasting", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "vein-curing"; and if the basilic is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it  "vein-curing", and it is on the top,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is that which we call  "vein-curing", which opens clearly above the navel.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little finger is the vein between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has .i. rain;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the foot are .iii veins: one is located at the outer corner of the ankle joint, and
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	the second which is in the heel of the right leg; and the vein called 'nesse', which is located in the heel of the left leg;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are  .iii veins located from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The ear canal, which is behind the ears, should be cleaned with old catarrh, and with headache.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the medicine, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the disease.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the area where the veins are with an asperged cloth; then tie the patient's neck with a band.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the three veins appear behind the ears, depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lance and pierce through the vein up to the bone, and then lift your hand up towards the top of the vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and wrap it with care, and cut through the vein very carefully, and let blood flow as much as you can see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then strain and hold it, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and the cautery of the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause headaches in old age,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and if there is pain and redness, and a habit of tears;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the blood vessel is such that I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is necessary to extract his neck until the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and he must put his hand on both sides of his face, and then sign with his eyes;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	and then he will place the cupping glass above his second finger, and suck out the blood;
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and he will leave the vein open, and cover it with a cloth, just as you did with the previous two veins, and let the blood flow according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then untie the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then let it rest, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of its beginning from the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein at the forehead is as effective as the healing of the headache from ancient diseases, and it causes headaches, and bright lights.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that if the patient twists his neck, so that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	and take the instrument which is called a 'spoon', whose shape is thus:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And place the point on the vein, and hold firmly with your hand, or another thing, and allow the blood to flow according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then cut off the neck of the patient, and tie the vein as long as it is healthy, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the fire must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is close by, and the flame might break if it is too small.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health problems that can be helped with this are the three veins in the arms and legs that cause pain when they become inflamed or infected, and also conditions of the eye, skin rashes, and facial diseases.
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the qualities of their health are that the patient should extrude his neck by twisting it, as before.
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then heal, and let the health flow through, a little of long flame, a little of wide flame, for there is no fire.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, in case of a breeze; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then hold it on cloth, and hold it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The patient of the birth pangs of the child so that he is well watered, and sudoriferous diseases, and diseases of the face.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	such as headaches and redness that come to the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the patient so that the sick person twists his neck, then pulls his baby by the hand with his left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a long, flexible flame, and put it on the lip in the space between the iij. nostrils;
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well now, and the blood will begin to run.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not over-exert yourself too much yet, and make the blood flow according to your need, then rest for a night, because it is soon restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is the form of the fire:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	This is the text on the five wounds: si aide à l'estrangement de l'ailaine, et à l'encomancement de mélancolie, et à beaucoup de maladies, et à l'empétige, et à la corruption, et aux hernies, et estiomenes;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the wound is such that the patient pulls out his hair from both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and if the master stands over the head of the sick person, and the sick person cuts off with .i. cut,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein long a little, then treat the blood quickly, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then mend another in the other vein, then hold the ligature, and pull out the hair gently;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that the patient does not choke; and leaves it until morning, that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	of the health of the animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	of the health of the mouth and teeth, and their correction, and the repair of gums, and the repairs of lips, and the growth of nails, and swelling of the tongue.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of health is to make the patient sit before you, and to hold his throat as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	and turn the lip, and watch as .ij. veins, one is at the right lip and the other is at the left,
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and know them by what they are black, and because between them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	then turn one and the other, and if you do not know them, and if you are in doubt about it,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then turn the larger of the two, and do likewise with the .ij. veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	In regard to the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	In relation to the health of the tongue
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healer is that the disease seizes between your hands in front of the sun, and he lifts up the tongue, and looks at each side with a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So heal both, and do not become too perfect, for soon the veins will be black.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins that are commonly used are done according to .ij. ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where it pierces with all kinds of flames, or olive oil, so as to call it "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and thin according to the width and the stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is called "mirtin", and it is wide as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is a skill to open the veins of thick blood which appear on the flat surface of the head and contain thick blood and trouble;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the flame of olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle to point out, and it is for saving the subtle veins, or there is subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The salve of the basilica, which is one of these veins, so helps with diseases that are in the throat, and where the collar, and where the chest, and where the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon that he cauterize, and that he bandage it with wool, and that he not pierce the artery which is exposed.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he stops the artery, and the flow of blood comes, if it is necessary to cauterize, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and it must not be struck by the flame, but cut as Anesile.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the bascule does not open obviously, if it is necessary that you extract it, and change another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	If you want to prevent it from happening again, or if you are injured at the base of the arm, it opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and hold the wound in fire as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you can recognize the injury's location, so that you extract the arm, and touch the spot until you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	Then sign the spot with a pen, then extract the arm, and hold the wound in fire as we have said.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not wound in the artery when you see it moved from its place, for that is the artery: therefore avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	and if you see spitting up high as the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Therefore hasten, and put your finger on your throat for a long time, then lift your finger off it, so that the blood may come out once again;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	lay your arm down, and leave it, and do not move the sick person; and be afraid, and do not move it until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if there is no blood coming out, and he goes away, and the medicine does not reach him, then cut the artery if it opens, for the head of the shoulder retains it; stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fir tree and split it, and take one half and tie it well together until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the bleeding has stopped, that is good; if not, apply the powder that stops blood, as we have said;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the application of the powder is not made in many ways because of the small size of the wound and the position of the vein on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The doctor will instruct the patient to let the veins empty of blood between the shoulder blade and the neck, and between the heart and the collarbone.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	For it is composed of the bazillical and cephalic parts, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	And it is necessary for the doctor to cut through the nerve that is at the base of the neck, and if he cuts too much in perfection, he will tear the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells up and the patient's health is ruined, and perhaps it cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and the nerve is opened many times, and if it does not open in any of them because of its thinness, you should cut off the nerve with a sharp tool; and avoid cutting the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a space between the two nerves, then make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The treatment for the headache is to attract blood from the head, and to draw the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to heat the olive oil or the wine, for that is the most effective for all kinds of wounds, because it does not burn the nerve or the artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	All the same, it is necessary to try out the easier method first, and not to worry if the first time it fails, and then start over again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the limbs of some men swell up when it is tried out for the first time, but nothing is lost if this happens.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the treatment depends on your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you need to know about a doctor is that medicine should only be used for the sake of maintaining health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the surgery be performed in one of the three veins that run through the head: which are, cerebral, facial and basal;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should perform surgery when the signs of fullness appear after eating, in autumn and winter after dinner, when the sign of satiety appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should perform surgery on the first day or third day after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The saint who is free from diseases has no specific time for fasting or eating, but it should be done at all times and in all seasons.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And women should not fast or eat until they are 13 years old, and girls for three months after their seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the old be made to fast when they have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone is made to fast, in whatever way it may be, let him not eat any leathery food.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	If there is blood coming out, so that the veins do not draw out the harmful waste matter into the main members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	do not heal those who are too sunburned by meat, nor those who are oily, as much as there is fire, nor those who drool.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if he heals after a feverish passion, and vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, and frequent sexual intercourse, and fasting, and sleep, and hunger, and all these things, or by a weapon or the heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly the humors, so that he becomes fat, through meat, drink, and medicine, if you have any power over it;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter the bathwater, if anything is dangerous to him, to make subtle the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal his back from the neck down, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and protect him from work, or hunger, or lustful desires, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be tied and joined together, and be higher in healing than the one who heals him, and rub his arms. 12 times or 13 times,
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then remove the ligature gently, for if it is too tight or loose, it cannot run without being restrained.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the joint by hand until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then dip the finger of his left hand into a little vat of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein for a moment or two.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein stops bleeding.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run as strings of music, and some like these are prone to windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts it on the flame, if one takes it away from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and so are those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if one opens the vein, if the wound is too narrow, lest it cause pain to the patient in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, let it be done again after a while or when one is in hospital, if the legs are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if his arm is swollen, and the patient hopes, let it be for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	For in case there are abscesses; do not go into water, but begin to wash if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if his fracture is small, or the bone does not protrude much from the skin so that you do not doubt that it will not come out as much as you see, then in this very fracture I recommend burning with fire all along the bone;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and make a small incision so that the swelling is reduced; for this often happens, when the wound is small:
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound open, do not recommend the medicine, and put a little oil of oil on it, for it smoothes the course of blood in this place, and it becomes soft in this place that the oil that is in it.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and so administer the oil of oil in each wound that you heal the veins to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and so it makes three times and bows of oil when you put it on the wound; if it is too thick, it subsides slowly when applied.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there is a large abscess that often comes; most importantly when it is not healed except for this time or the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hurry, and place on the joint a wet sponge of water and of rope a little warm, and hold it in for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the blood has left the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green color, then it is not harmful to him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see it, put on something of aloe or mirrhor poultice made from juice of calament, monstere, or similar;
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often the swelling and appearance is to the side of the temple: so place your hand on it, and if you feel the joint soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the appearance of illness.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschui donc que tu ne mettes sur aucune chose de ce que nous avons dit, car par aventure en cour sans de l'artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le lieu, puis le guérit d'autre cure, tant qu'il soit sain.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat everyone with the same amount of medicine according to the quality and color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are thin and have a need to extract blood, one should make the wound wider and keep the flames wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary that they be cured little by little, and they must be cured by cutting across, not by piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this way of curing is saved from the decay of blood and the chopping of nerves, and it is better than the long cure or the wide cure.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to those whose course requires curing, it is necessary to give them moist juice in grape juice; if they are heated, if the blood is troubled, three times or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, before the curing, give him moist juice in musk syrup, or honey syrup aromatized with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he swallows it at meals, after the exit of blood, if it is necessary that he smells wine and aromatic syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or ointment of syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up from one arm and sometimes swallows again, if it is necessary that, when he becomes weak from much vomiting, he should be given a little at a time, according to the quantity of his continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he vomits up from one arm after the first swallowing, and he has a strong heart, then he should be given
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who gets well on another part, if he must get well the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has blood that is deep within the body and brings fever; if so, a great quantity must be drawn off, and the opening made wide enough to allow a large amount of pus to flow out.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	and then you treat all the symptoms and put your hand on his pulse when he is getting well, so that death does not come from pus.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when the sick person is neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see that the arm has dislocated, and make it come out with blood for the second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on top of it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if he is bent, that he extends the arm gently, because this would be wrong;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but leave it until the second time he heals; or you point to the tip of the flame, until the blood that has been frozen by the opening of the vein comes out;
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on top. I put a little water of salt, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if a vein has burst, leave it alone and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is calm.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if need be, drain the blood a second time, whether it is in the same vein or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is more important than the vein at the base of the hand, for whatever reason it may be composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of draining the blood is such that the patient holds his hand in warm water until it turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then let there be a small movement, so that the vein appears clearly, then take care now to cut it across, not wide nor long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the hole be wide, and cut well close to the joint of the hand, and so it cannot come out, then put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is stiff, do not put the hand in warm water again, for we put it there more for ease than for stiffening.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the vein cut from this is safer than any other vein, as it is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The salvation of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it should be done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	withdraw the hand, and pour into hot water, until the vein has gone back in, if we can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and hold it across, and cut all of it off, if it doesn't hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't cut it too perfectly, for the nerve is all exposed from the bone;
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, it is frozen there in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and thread to bind it firmly together, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The surgeon should take the hand with the disease from the patient and make all the cuts as I have told you before the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The surgeon should treat all diseases that are separated from the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English, line by line:
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is that the patient should drink some warm water, and rub the vein until it stops."
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the joint at the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go most of the rain;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Here is the translation of the provided text into English, line by line:
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are exposed, and treat it as well as you would a wound, and let the flame be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the nerve cannot be extracted, put the foot in water, and leave the vein to drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if you treat it for the first time, start again for the second time above a small hole, because the leech is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do the same with the other foot evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint, and its pain extends to the knee, when it's due to cold.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of this pain is that the patient goes in or out of the water, and pulls it off the ankle. iiij. two must twist,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so that you can feel it with all your fingers, and running across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and worth more than you can pay, for the leg is out, and it is very heavy to many men.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not treat it, neither does any rain of him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the small bow, and keep away from the water;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make the blood flow so that you see it, and then draw the arrow, and put cotton on it and hold it in; now it is cured.
Des sainies de ventouse	Suction wounds
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or of ark-glass, or of pottery; and the suction is made in one of two ways: either by injuring and pulling out blood, or without injuring.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation, which is not to hurt according to .ij. ways: or it is on all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation which is made by hurting and by extraction of blood so is made in 13 parts from the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	from where one is all at the top; and the others are around the throat;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and 2 in 2 places on the throat; and the windpipe under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the vacuum of the shoulder joint; and the vacuum on the shoulders;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the vacuums of the arms; and the vacuums of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the vacuums of the ankles; and the vacuum treatment does not treat blood flow, except for small veins that are scattered throughout the carriage,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and so you don't weaken yourself at all, as is done with vein bleeding;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be amined, or any fire or heat in any disease that comes from excess, until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of disease it is necessary to ventilate, or because of habits, if we administer it every hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and burn it and put it in each ten;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to ventilate, become very heavy;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who have repletion and pain in their face, and in their head, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouth, and have flown away with the tongue, and are satisfied with blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are any such people who think, and see by no blood or vomit or death or similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to be breathed after .iij. hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The saint of music helps the greyness of the head ... if it comes to the eyes, and does not come until the whole body has been evacuated.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation if it is in the place of the head of the skull,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not suit anyone who has a cold complexions to use it, or who has had a fever, because this does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for that reason neither the old nor those who have had cold illnesses should use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured of it often become confused, and for that reason the ventilating should be placed a little further back due to the confusion caused by the cure.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The venting of the wind comes from the neck, which is in place under the chin and the bazoo, and for this reason it causes irritation to the pit.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and a cutting of the channel of the stomach, and all, and filling up;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and so it is necessary to push back, for if it holds too firmly, then either hunger or the stomach or both.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The venting of the wind comes from the neck, which is in pain under the chin, and causes blindness and dizziness, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And it is in the place of the shrine of the basilica; and you must command the physician that he express his hand to apply, that he not cut the artery, and do not cause the blood to flow.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilations of the mouth cause disease of the mouth and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the shrines of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the shoulders cause disease that comes from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilations of the collar cause as much as the three veins of the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for she brings blood from those large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the blood vessels and nerves are easily damaged, and the veins and arteries are exposed.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back should not be placed too deeply, and should not hurt the foundations or the nerves, and it must be large and of iron, for its job is to suck well; and perhaps, if it were too delicate, it would break; and would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs should open widely, for they bring blood from all over the body, and cause pain to the old nerves, and the uterus, and the bladder, and draw forth flowers; and are in front of the 12th rib and the 12th shin bone, and after a long use, they weaken the body and bring about many diseases.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation of the text from Old French to English:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is thick, so it is necessary to hurt .ij. times: the first time to soften the path of the great pain.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick, so it is necessary to hurt the third time; and when we want to squeeze the little pain a little at a time, we must suffer a great deal once only.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to squeeze the pain, so we should start again; and if it is thick, so we must firmly hold it, and the end should be that the scream be heard all at once.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and cover those who have thick and tough skin, and who are prone to scrofula, with the oil of vitriol that softens and dissolves.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is seared, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or gourd seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is burned, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then use almond oil, or balsamite oil, or aniseed oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if there is someone who has an injured shoulder and chest, and it must be tended with oil and wide fabric, then do not put oil on.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash after the windification with pink water, or cold water, or water of blackberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other kind.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if there is moisture, if it raises thus, or with water of mistletoe, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And if there are great excesses, they rise with old wine, or water of sedge, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other things like them.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not get wet before the bath or bathe, but after the bath an hour or .ij.; and do not sleep after the wind-up,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is good that he warm himself, when he must be winded, and when he has been winded.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against those who are coleric, and whose blood is too hot and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he prunes cold things, like grapes and endives and lettuce by the sea, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and a little pork, and cheese, and wet meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, if they drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and little pork, and little piglets and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and let him urinate when he feels the urge, if he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is good to give some people a strong or musk-scented unguent before or after urination, to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be careful of the sun, but it is useful only for those who are hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leeches that are used to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and the mouse, and the podagra, and the belly, and the bouds, and the reins, and the hinch, for that member does not suffer to be hurt on the outs.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and one does not do it but to attract blood from one member to another.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we put on the teats when the milk comes; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and on the bouds to weaken the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and the bone the pain, when it has surgery or stone, if by its own virtue the surgery is attracted or deserts the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus do so because when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is repressed wind,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are emptied only to suck; and never are they emptied together fire, and never are they filled with fresh water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as such diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be 1 1/4 inches wide and half a palm long, and it should have a small hole at the center, about as big as an awl.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be of iron, smooth before so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the member;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a crossbar of iron or of steel, to hold a candle in place;
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and are great and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the leeches of children are other than those of old people, and thin ones than fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And it is necessary to put this leech on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the wax candle or .i. linen thread, and place it between the leech and the limb where the leech is to be placed,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the bellows so that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and your two hands are on the hole that we have said, so that when you blow, if there is steam, and then take off the bellows;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the poultice as before, and start it over again, if you need to;
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the bellows which is amined for pleurisy, with all water, has no verge or hole, and is amined only when it is plain of water, and is put on the limb as little as possible;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	And these are not suited for use except in limbs where it is difficult to place suction cups because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar parts.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on naked legs, such as two or three toes, and other similar parts.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of their use is that when you find suction cups that are in clear, non-runny water, take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in a broth of sweet water until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies.
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then poultice it with vinegar and poultice, then rub the limb until it is red, and put poultices on it;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are well, and have cheer, if it is their leg or where one can put a poultice, one puts it on, for this is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the leg thus, and then of water, very well, and then squeeze it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if he lies too long after the heart of the sun, so that .i. a cloth of linen in cold water, and put it on, until the sun is dried up;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the sun is multiplied, then put on crushed vitriol, or gangrenous matter, and similar things until it is dried up;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or put on half a handful of peeled beans, and leave them burning at the heat, so now they will be dried up;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more business, then take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the blood will not take up, then rub the base of the wound with fresh blood, or insert an needle so that the blood flows.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, so they start;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are crying, then powder on a little of alum and of sloe juice, or of ash, so they will stop crying now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of broken bones
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapisters are necessary many times in the art of medicine, and are restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know it well, son of a bitch, that the very wise men pour this chapister on, which they never saw in any ancient books, nor did they ever read about it in letters;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, because I never found any good one before;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and know nothing, except from the science of ancient books, or I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by custom, in my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have summarized it at the end, and have explained clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the above 2 chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore fitting that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and remain on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or torsion or damage comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if anything does not prevent him from walking, as weakness of the spine, or disability, or age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the tenon is too short, or too frequently; and avoid cold drinks, and the car of eyes and hair, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about the tendon's heat, or the material's expansion in the member; if the sick person returns to their usual governance which they used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that are great nutrition, or have viscosity, like cooked bread made with water and rice, and eggs, and milk, and cheese, and fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with great nutrition the healing slows down and happens more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and weak will not heal or harden properly according to their nature because of the weakness of the limbs, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but there is no cure, restore the broken bone. i. large, tough tendons that join the member together, until it hardens as it was before; and do not cut off any part of its work, and because it is necessary to nourish it with large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various and in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is other than the fracture of the leg, or of the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes to the shoulder, and another in the knee, or in the foot, as when one cuts with a knife for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a small fracture that creates a tiny crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each has its own way of working, and its own special instrument for healing, according to what comes to mind in its turn.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and is caused by the twisting of the bone, and is opened well from the outside, and is pressed by the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or torments in it, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can also have twists, or fractures, or small breaks.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move it by hand, but put medicines on it that come later, and then now hold it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that it has in the shoulder, and there are three separate parts, now put them together evenly, so that the bone does not move.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if the abscesses are dry, so that you leave it for a day or two until the abscesses have healed.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	and then put it in a position that is even and steady, so that you do not move the shoulder, and know that the rehabilitation of this is easier than that of the other, then hold it, as it is necessary here.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are pieces of bone broken off, if the break is in two parts, whether hand or foot, or at your hand if it's a small member, or in two strings, or a string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member back in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are put back together, you must reset all the additions to their places as well as you can, and guard against injury or pain for the patient by your work.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and align the two head pieces of bone according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if it seems to be all right: if the movement is smooth and good, and does not strain too much, do not press it as they do with the aposteme cautery and contraction of the member, as we have often wanted to.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are set in place, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither in waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and guard well that the limbs be so secure that they feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when one feels no pain, then it is not yet set in place, and it is necessary to put it into a state of rest so that one feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and guard well that it be placed correctly, so that no twistedness comes when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as hands and feet and similar things: it is convenient to wrap linen cloths of soft and fine material around them;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are thick, such as chest and leg: it is convenient to wrap a broad and sturdy linen cloth around them, for the broad linen cloth embraces all of the large member, and holds it even, so that there is no gap;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then he takes it slowly in two places or three according to the limb, and holds back his hand a little at all of it, then goes up over the break and holds less back, so that the break is moved just a little bit.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and softens the limb little by little, until you press a lot of it on the sound side, then take another limb and turn around again very much on the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the sound part of the break, and hold it slightly, not too hard or too lightly, as we have said in the first line above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the linen threads or drapes, until they are all the same length, then lay it all over with .i. bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or an infection, put something soothing on the abscess and let it sit for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then extract from your bones, and make half a yard of wide thread for bleeding, or a piece of wood used to make cleats, or palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the bone that one puts on the fracture is a little bigger and wider than the other bones;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also long or short according to the size of the member;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then tighten on the pegs also as you did at the first hour, then tie above it a thread advancing, as in the first hour over the breaker;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and then tighten more, less; and it is necessary that the thread be light, not too thick nor too thin, and of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, such as I wanted for the works of the fools who make shoulder strings from linen rope, and this is a great mistake, because the shoulder string cannot be even if it is too thin, and it is necessary that there be between each peg at least two inches of space.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is torn by the shoulders of the pegs after stringing them up in his clothes, or linen cloth, so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the cure is broken, I will tell the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not appropriate to extract all the members of a broken limb on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are great, it is not appropriate to put braces on them before 2 or 3 days or more according to the severity of the injury in the apoplexy; but
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and here is the manner of the ancient plaster to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist: and it is that you take flour which holds on the walls of the mill, and confound it with plenty of ash, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plasterer restoring the fracture to various dispositions, especially for women and small children, for it is not appropriate to be too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for repairing breaks, dislocations, and twists: take 3 parts of resin, 2 parts of sand, 1 part of myrrh; 5 parts of aloes, 60 parts of mirth; 70 parts of alchil; and reduce them to a powder, and mix them with honey. The composition of the plaster is warm; use it therefore, for it repairs broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of making plaster for twists: take 3 parts of mugwort and 2 parts of vismac; 5 parts of myrrh, 60 parts of aloes; 7 parts of acacia; and grind them well, and mix with honey or bee pollen, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of making plaster for joints and bones that have come loose from their places, which soothes pain immediately, and cuts bone properly: take a new bone, soak it in water, and oil it; place it on the affected area. This plaster does not repair, but it is good for immediately soothing hot pain and properly cutting bone.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of making plaster that repairs broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth leaves of the poplar tree; grind them together to make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Other way of plastering to the restoration of the fracture of the bone and for lessening the remaining part of the abscess. Take root of viscose, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of times, from each one a part; and grind, and confit with wine, and so the members are heated, confit with water of coriander wet, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way of plastering which is stronger than the first, when the abscess lasts until the restoration of the member. Take roots of viscose, and flax seed, hyssop, melilote, and sweet cicely, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from each one a part; and grind, and confit with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras says that one should not put on the broken member for restoration any plaster made of wax and oil, and no other thing more; and he said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things which are a little warm, such as mirr, aloe, and incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plastering that is useful for both pain and injury: take mugath and the hair of a horse or cow, or feathers of an owl, and whale oil and string it evenly, and grind them together, and make the plaster and lay it on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then take care that the patient feels no pain, and that his bone does not move out of place; if he feels no pain, do not take care.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain or itching comes to the place, or there is no rest or swelling, do not take care, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip it in water, and lift it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put another dry one on, moistened with sea water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of the warmth;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and ease the pain of the bone, then begin again the gentle application, and a little plaster, and do not pull it as hard as before; and gently until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that abscess, redness, pain, and swelling have set in all over, and you need to apply plaster and bandage, then begin again, as you did with the first application of equal length.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it comes to the limb neither of what we have said, then do not dislodge it before 2, 3, or 5 days, and never let it rest for more than 10 days, according to what one sees, until the break-up of the abscess, and bring closer the joint to the bone;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	then restrain it more than before, and thickens its meat, as I said above; and if you see that the limb is drying up more than it should, know that there will be no return for it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Let water arise from the hot bath every time you dislocate it, and do this for each quarter of the day, and pour a little liquid at noon.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this operation, therefore, the member is to be brought back into place, and carefully examined as to what has caused the dislocation, so that it may be set right: this is bad, and if the pain persists and grows worse, I see no other remedy but to let it lie and operate properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breaking, and various shapes, and the causes are distinct:
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For it has fractures which are made by the impact of a sword, and the collar bone breaks all the way down to the shoulder which is as if made like this or was; and for this reason this manner of breaking is called "hematoma".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword breaks the bone from above without piercing, and is called in this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an impact inside, or a break or collar of stone, or a fall on stone, or other things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a perforating break, which approaches as far as the sinew which is outside the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if to a wound that is healed in the bone as fine as hair, and is a small split, and therefore this is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by a stone, or by a blow, or by a similar thing, and a piece of bone enters it, and the head of the bone is as sharp as a blacksmith's hammer when he hammers on the kettles; if it goes into the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And if this happens to an adult who has a moist head of bone, as is the case with an infant's skull.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and all these types of fractures that small pieces are forged if they are stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and investigation to the tent, and by the corrupt horse which is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed on top of it, causing a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for a fracture, be cautious of accidents due to disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of reason, extension, paleness, feverishness, and hot sweat, and other similar symptoms in many dispositions, it cannot be cured without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a promising accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the cure.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when you first deliver the baby, and it is in the winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh of the bone does not decay, and the accident that we have spoken of comes.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the part that covers the skull, then you must split it open in this way: and it is that you squeeze the chief of the sick person, and uncover the bone on all sides that you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the pain of the wound comes with the uncovering of the bone, or abscess, then he helps himself in this way, and it is that you fill the place with wet fabrics soaked in oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be assured of the escape of blood; then begin to cut around the bone, and this is done according to .ij. ways of operation: one way is that you make the incision closely from the front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I give another cut that is larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have several cuts of different sizes, some narrow and some wide, pointed, and made of iron; and with light touches, so as not to hurt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, then you must pierce it with these; also, make each of them come out at the tip of the bone, so that one comes out at the top of the bone, and this is the form of the 3 ways of making the tarres:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it is convenient that you retain the appliance that is retained by the bone to any other instrument resembling an incision tool, but it is necessary that it be more soft and thinner than the other incision tool.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it does not retain any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly held by  .I. instruments; then cure the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work if it is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and press it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture is open, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will set the head of this lens-shaped chisel on it, from which comes the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and this part is wet in 1 . 2 . edges, so that the cutting goes against the bone; then pound with a small mallet on it, so that you chop the bone lightly all around, and take good care of the tendon that is attached to it;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is attached to the bone, then chop the bone lightly, because if you damage the bone, there is no benefit, and there is fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce the membrane, and the bone is cut only slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then feel the roughness again, and shave off the scales with a sharp razor, of which you must have different quantities, to apply according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are facing a great many razors, and after them more delicate ones, do not cease to do this as long as it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and delicate shaves, you must bring your skill to bear according to its needs; this is something that has not yet been fully explained to those who have set their studies in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is deep, you must bring a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, dip it in oil, and put it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another cloth double-layered, or triple-layered, dip it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so that you do not damage the wound, then remove it only when it has soaked up the liquid;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be so.i. day or 10 days, as long as the abscess is calm, then remove it, and administer drugs like roots of herbs, flour of times, incense powder, aristo logy, and similar things; and make these things into powder, put on the wound, and administer drugs again without torture but with medicine;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and guard that the wound is clean and not infected, nor let it gather pus or assemble bowels, for when the bowels corrode and flow onto the brain's membrane, they may cause great harm to the patient; because when one puts a mordant substance on top of a wound, if it seeps through above, it can be harmful.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take caution, for if any bad accident should happen to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if black comes out only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has its virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey, and 1.2 parts of rose oil and bind 1 drapelet to it, and lay it on the wound's medicine;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the treatment of ways as it seems appropriate, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that no time are broken the .ij. parts of a neck above, or one by the alone, for they are .ij. bones; and this neck is cartilaginous, and does not break if it bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the  .ij. parts is broken, it is necessary that you stop your little finger or pertuse above the neck, and put equal to the break in your index finger, and at the back by defect, until the neck revives according to its natural shape;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and make it lightly, and guard that the patient does not feel pain by your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if his break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, know that you must put the neck even with the head of a thin ray.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if his break is in two parts, then do not delay restoring it on the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess has become calm, then bind it at the head of the neck with linen strips; if his break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	And you bind the other one to the other, if his break is in one part; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they said that one should soak the tents in lard and change them every day. I don't think that's right, but they should be soaked in ash of pigeon and powder of mill; then leave the tent, until the bone is hard and the joints hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never blow on or use goose feathers in place of tents, and if it's so cold that the drape is torn, and the wind blows through it, and it hurts the patient; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses open while you are operating, then put cotton wicks soaked in oil or a little vinegar; or a little of this substance.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscesses don't open, then put an ointment on it from afar, made of barley meal and incense powder, mixed with pigeon ash, then put it on light bandages, and don't tie the compress;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract with suitable instruments to that person, then cut off the end, and the cure of things causing pain in the chest, and also, as plasters and ointments suitable for that person.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no pain inside the neck, then cure of fever, and put strings of linen, as long as it is healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no pain, and the break is not large, and it is not broken into two pieces, but rather bent inside, then you should know that it is a light break.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side, put your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand inside, and push the break slightly, and make it equal with the other hand by pulling it away, and let it be.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the mandible is in two places, so that it is convenient that you arrange the extensions of two parts, as long as they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth is due to a break, so that they are strained by a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken mandible a waxed cloth, and on it 1 double drape; and on the drape put a large well-made plate, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and fasten it with the threads you have cut, and order the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the shape has changed, so change it back on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put plaster on top, with flour from the mill mixed with a lot of ash or wheat flour, after you have taken off the wax; and put on another light plaster, and if the plaster dries up, and the patient's condition does not change, leave him until he is well; many times he will be well in 1 week.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come up, so administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take out any piece of bone, but use the appropriate tools for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, so broaden it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have brought all the bones together, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, and put on it plaster appropriate to this, to keep clean, until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the shoulder
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	of the shoulder The forcele breaks several times in front, before the shoulder, and the break is such that: it is broken and dislocated in 2 ways, and has parts, and is easy to restore; or there is a break with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the overtakes are such that: when the break is without injury, you have 2 ministers, so that one tints the shoulder joint that is broken; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or hair of it.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have more to extend, then put on the shoulder a round pole of fabric, or of linen, and make it large according to your need; and let the forcele be extended, and the pole be held by your hand, so that you make even the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from the opposite side, so that it comes off completely, then let the patient lie down on his other side, and put the shoulder to rest. i.e. a small ear is bent, and the minister lifts up the shoulder blade as far as possible.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on both sides, and if you find it broken, then let it be broken; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join together for any reason, then put the tool away, in order to save the life of the patient:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should be like a spoon, and is not thin, and is also wide enough according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and there are 1.5 inches, as you can see, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, just as the break in the wound that you made when you pulled the bones together:
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are confident that the wound is closed, then put it to rest; and if the break is small, or if you doubt about closing the wound, then use a bandage or tent, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses arise, then moisten them with oil of roses, with mint, and with wine, and put on them.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no fracture, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the mill and the ash of the oven, and put light staples on it, and put a spike on the joint if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very long band of a palm's width, then put two layers of oilcloth on it, and cover it with the plaster; then take a thin stake of two hands' width and long, and wrap it around the bandage so that the top of the bandage is hanging;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stake on the break, and turn the bandage over the shoulder, and wrap the oilcloth around the back of the neck, and tie it on both sides of the shoulder; and take it off each day, and when you see that the break is holding in place, and when you can clearly see that the stake is not moving on top of the bone, then put it back on again, and when you feel that the bandage is tight, if it is painful, release a little;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and let the disease rest on its two sides, and put it when he sleeps . i. small wing open the shoulder, so that the dislocation comes up; if the fracture is eased by the alignment of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, and no bad accident comes, until xx days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then begin the treatment again if you see that it is needed, and hold and leave it so until it has healed; and it is healed in about xx days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	then begin the treatment again if you see that it is needed, and hold and leave it so until it has healed; and it is healed in about xx days, and less for some men.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone pokes out front, and there is no opening to let it out, if done so, and the bone, and do as we have said in breaking the forceps to relieve an abscess quickly.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break from the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And the piece is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks on one side; and when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the back, and causes great pain to the patient, and lack of air, and sometimes vomits blood, and feels a sharp pain in the broken bone, and smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and you put him between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and carefully make them even in all ways as they should be; then wrap it in a light cloth, and cover it with salt or other lighter material, and tie it firmly to the bone, so that it does not move; and turn him over gently to his back, and hold him tight, and loosen it every hour, and if he relaxes, let him go, and remove the wrap, and treat the area in a way that suits you; then remove the wrap, and hold him firmly until he is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I understand that the rib fracture can only be found in the large ribs behind the back, and at the top towards the middle, and they do not hurt much unless they are sore; and I feel it well when asked.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And if you make the fracture even, as it should be; and then put plaster on it, and tie it with a strap, unless you need to do otherwise.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib fracture is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and hiccups, as though they are crying; for the bone rubs against the lining; and they become very pale, and it is a cause of great illness, and the old people have put up with great trouble.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if to those who serve that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, to drive the wind away from the back.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, so that heated abscesses do not come, if it has not come yet.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let the patient be quiet.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of us says that we put vials on the top, to suck out the excess, and this is reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the vials do not attract the excesses to the top by the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And said no one of them that it is necessary to cover the place of another wet in oil hot, and put tents between the ribs so as to make equal the space inside, then be cured by the cure of pus, flesh and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear by the bone that points to the sling, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to split on his place of the bruised rib, and it is necessary to put a tool 1 . i . to hold him; and then the bone must be cut, and drawn lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with poultices until he is well. And if abscesses come up, then put on drapings wet in oil rosin, and put on his place; and cure while the place of that who has to an abscess, and let rest sore on his rib where it must, until he is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the rupture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No one comes who breaks the bones of the neck, and it happens that he cries; and also to the back pain.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Et when it has come to any, and you know if he will be healed or not, if take ward that you see his hands softened and swollen and dead, and they can't move or extend, and when you pinch them with an needle, so does not smell. Know that it is fatal in many dispositions, and if they mute and smell well when you extract them and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if he is put cure.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And when similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know if he will be healed or not, if take ward that his bones are softened, and that the accident that is in his hands, and on his back wind it and excretes without will; and when it has been put with water on its belly, so does not excrete without will. And when it is put down on its back and he tightens, he can't. Know that it is fatal: do not work at all in its cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure if it is that you reward if he has chapped lips, put on the spine oil of rose or oil of moef as much as it is calmed; then put on one of the compresses comforting and drying, and tie it with a string, and command to the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some tooth is dislocated, then cover it with lead; and tie the tooth, then join together the 20 lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with an ointment involving char, until it is healed; and if the tooth root is broken, which is called the "root of the tooth," then pour out your urine from your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand, then apply the plaster and bandage, if you need to; then tie it up, and if there are any teeth that have come loose, then sew them back on, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	For if the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, let it not be too much of a break at the top; and make it long, and decline to the back, and comes to the patient pain in the place, and swelling, and aching where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the reset if you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, then make it equal, as much as it can be in natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if his break is long, or it declines inwardly, then make the patient lie on his stomach until you have healed that break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you put the plaster on, then put a board of wood or of bark on top of it, and tighten the break so that it does not move, and fix the position of the bones until they are even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses break out, if he doesn't scratch, until the abscesses are calm, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and tighten it as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	the dislocation of the shoulder
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	and tie the two ends of the rope, and lift them up, and cut the patient on one side; then put the broken end of the arm onto the edge of the meat, then dip it in meat juice, then raise it again with a heavy object or help from ministers; then hold the broken end evenly with both hands, as it returns to the way it should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other way is that if the patient lies on their back, and ties the rope to their neck, then commands two ministers: one to hold the end of the rope at his hands, and the other to hold it on both sides; and so they extend it to its place.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then hold him fast by the ligature on the breach, and on the breach, and extend each of the ministers to his part. And if the breach is near the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary for you to place a ligature across the shoulder, and another towards the back, holding the breach; and if the breach is towards the back, then it is necessary to place a ligature lightly, without effort, as long as the breach is even on its place, and on its back; then make the breach even, as it should be, and hold him fast, so that the pustule does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the pustule comes out, then do not hold it back more than 20 days, and put on it with a gentle hand and rose oil, until the pustule is calm; then hold it fast, and the way to hold it fast is that you put the plaster on the breach, then bring the arm up by the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and wrap the cloth around, and hold fast on the arm, and on the shoulders, so that the arms are in a comfortable position, unless something hurts them or the bones are broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use stilts, and put on the breach a stilt wider and stronger than the others, and have between each stilt 2 inches of space, and let each stilt be so large that it passes the breach by 2 inches on each side; then hold fast on the stilts, in this way as I said at the beginning of the chapter on the plaster on the breach, more strongly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the sitting of stars, and extraction, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the apotheosis hot, let it be tied until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each .iij. days the ligature, that itching does not flower and come to place, or that the newness of pain does not come to the member because it is too tightly bound. If he re-injures himself, as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such an accident does not come, if only you do not remove the ligature until after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and place the shoulder joint with a plain of equal wool, and look at each hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the ligature; if he responds to the power of medicine, and gives him the food that we have mentioned above, in such a way that the food is in the first layer; and when it begins to improve, let it be thick. And it is usual for the shoulder joint and the leg to be regained in ten months; and then it must be removed and bath and medicines of ointments applied to restore it. And if the tightening is ugly and blocked, wait to remove it for one day or more than one month.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of .ij. bones, which are called the "foscile," of which one is small, and that is what follows the hand; and the other is large, and that is what follows the little finger; perhaps the large foscile breaks alone, or the small one, and perhaps they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when they are broken together. If it is only the small foscile that is broken alone, then the thing to do is to stretch it lightly, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large foscile that must be stretched more strongly; and extend it on .ij. cuisses, and bring the pouchet of the hand up higher than the other fingers, and the little fingers down lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross over himself in the middle, and .ij. cuisses before him higher than the patient can suffer any work; then extend the ministers' arms to the dislocated part at their hand, or a ligature, and one other minister to the other above it. And then make the patient even, according to his better form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, each one is put in its place, and if there is none that can hold the cure, and you cannot restore it to its place, then stretch it on the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the broken piece there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; if take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the healing there come abscesses, I have spoken about it to the singular chapter; if take care. i. a bandage made of oil-roset and bleached wax, which is not too hard nor too soft; and place the bandage gently above the abscesses, so that the abscesses are calmed down. And then take off the wax, and put the plaster of the powder from the mill with much ash, and put the splints, and it must be that there are vj. splints or more in different positions: whether the break is in one bone or in 2.; and squeeze more above the break than anywhere else, and always less as it moves away, so as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and they are not too hard nor too rough; and let the thread, from which it is squeezed, be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And after some days reward the member and the ligament.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as when a itching comes to the member, then it is necessary that you water the member with hot water until the itching is calmed down; and let the member rest without being squeezed. And then begin again to squeeze, and if the ligament is soft and the bone has healed, then treat them as described.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the member is too tight, then it is necessary that you make it soft a little, and leave it so for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then begin to squeeze again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if any of these things that we have said come to the patient, then let him not be separated until .xx. days have passed or until he has become entor, then let him tie his hands to his neck, and let his necks be even, and keep them from moving and changing, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this breaker is restored in .xxx. days or in .xxxv., and perhaps in .xx. days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break in the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on both sides there are few breaks, and it comes only once in a while.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, let it be that the patient cries out, and sits upright before him evenly; then put his hand on a table extended, and extend the ministers the broken bones, and make them even the miriels, until they are well joined; and put the plaster and the stoies, if there are any, then wrap it up in 1. drapes of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, se leur enlève les yeux qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And if the break is in the back, then it is necessary that you put a stake on top, and another at the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then hold it tight around the hand, and tie the string between the two hands tightly.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break is in one of the two hands, then it is necessary that you make it flat, as it should be; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that it does not move, then put a small straight stake to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in the other two hands, then you tie them both together tightly, so that they do not move, and you put a stake on top, as if you were tying a pouche; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and attend to the one who comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, se leur enlève les yeux qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies down, then each minister extends his leg in an equal manner to his side; and it is when the break is made in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the cubit, then one of the legs extends toward the knuckle, and the other leg extends below the break; and if it is near the kneecap, then one leg extends upward and the other downward; then the minister makes the bone equal with his two hands according to its natural shape, and then he sets the splint, and ties it, so that the chaff does not come out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it rest then return to your work and your treatment; the hour is done in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap the broken .i. binde hard double in .ij. or .iiij., and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the birth, and bind .i. long thread between the thigh and the leg, and loose the knee desoz, and bring the chief of the thread over; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the binde, then put on the briseure stiles, and put a stile on the bone of the leg; then employ the place wet with drapelsou to make equal the strapping, then begin to tie form .iij. twists or iiij. on the briseure; and as you go up more on the briseure, and less the strap; then join the .ij. threads that you have bound between the leg and the thigh, and bind .iij. stiles that are above, then return to desoz at the chief of the thread, until you come off the foot; and the strapping, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it so, and if it does not come ne aposteme or swell or any other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to pass, if it looses, and addresses what comes, if as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold, if it is possible, and if not, if it is necessary to split the place, and draw hard; and cure it as we have said, until he is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the thigh broken in this way, as in the help and where the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration made thus there is no alarm for the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the wound is healed in .1. days, or less or more, according to the differences of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	For in the groin there is sometimes a little injury, but it often heals many times. And if it breaks, it is either a small fracture or a hole, and when it breaks, it feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that whoever has a joint broken should be put back in place as much as possible; then apply plaster and tie it up with a round strap, if you need one, and tighten it as we have said for other types of fractures, whether it is a chaud or another type of injury. And for each accident, do whatever is necessary to make it well.
de la brisure de la jambe	from the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Saiches that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are as those of the arm, and therefore the restoration is as that of the arm equally, and the work is all i.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the small bone is broken, then it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, then one feels great pain and sees it clearly; and turn back to the right way. Then bring an extension, and make it equal, and tie the joints equally; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the fracture be ugly, and there are more pieces, so that the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take 24 hair from the head of the patient, so that they surround the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the ankle up; then wrap them around 21 times above and below, and bind them together in the middle; and at this binding no leg should hang down to the right or left, and thus is it good; and each day move each hair of the leg, so that you can see whether there is an abscess or another accident; if the cure as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot there is sometimes a fracture and sometimes not, and it never happens except that it is broken in many ways.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of your foot are broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other; so put this patient on the ground like a dead man, just as if he were about to go away, and then now place your foot on its side, where those bones are raised, then press them until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and press it down, and put a small table of 1.2 pounds behind your leg, then bind those bandages tightly around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	After three or four days, if the leg is still swollen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them, just as we have said for the hands; then put a piece of wood on the broken part, which is slightly longer than the bone, and make it a little wider, then place the small table behind the foot, as I said before, and press the leg forward; and if there are more than two or three broken bones, put a piece of wood on each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one or two cloths of linen, and press the table behind the foot; and let it be placed on the top of the table so that it covers the foot's navel well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said for breaking things, when we have said it; and attend to each injury as it occurs.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone from the elbow joint
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is broken by nature, if the woman is seated enlarged, then she is inclined to the part of the back, and held behind; then fill the vagina with cotton, and put in it also as much as .i. a stone; then turn the woman over, and touch the back little by little, and then remove the cotton, until it comes into the opening of nature, and returns the bone with the stone; and when she goes to urinate, if she hold the cotton, and when she has urinated, then put it back again, and so for .vij. days or more: so will be healed the break, and she will not see, take a bladder of cow's milk, and tie a string to the hernia, and pour all the milk into the vagina; then blow in the string forming, until the milk is inside: nature will then return the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it for some days, until he is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the elbow is broken in man or woman, if he restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these breaks are not hidden from those who apply themselves to their study and use, and hear my book. For the break therefore means many things on the right way to restoration: hear then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vagina, when it is broken, take a bladder of owl and fill the vagina; then wrap bandages around, and leave them .iij. days or more, and it will be well in the hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the bone of the arm or shoulder or similar, now let us consider how to treat these fractures so that they are healed, as the evidence we have mentioned testifies.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, except for the vitriol stain, then you should start restoring the fracture in this very hour, or at least within a day, as the apothecmies will not come until then.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the apothecmies come within a day, then leave it for restoration until the next day, as long as the abscess has calmed down, and do not touch it again until three days have passed, for you could bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on the forehead uncovered, so that you should put it gently with your hand, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal in length on your hands, so that you can use this tool made of iron, which has 15 or 20 inches in length and whose width is according to the quantity of the wound; and because it is necessary to apply pressure to the member with your hand at your opening, and be sharp in front and thick in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called a "palainche," because the broken shoulder should be placed on the top of the visible bone; and it should be hit once, as long as it revives, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must chisel the top of the bone until the instrument can take it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, if you take an appropriate tool for this, or a chisel or a file, in your power; then resece that which is delayed in the bone with roughness and small scrapes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Et when the jaw is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. If it is in its place, then make sure it does not move; I.e., wrap it in black wine-styptic cloth, and carefully if it is in the flesh; and do not put anything on the wound except you cover it, so as to prevent the spread of pus or corruption, then administer tar when you have set the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and wrap it all around with the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound does not contract with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the sick, either dead or corrosive, without fail; and the ligatures are softer and milder than those of other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a worse accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, then it is not good to put anything on top of it except wrap it hard in place of tar; but wrap it all around with hard wrappings, instead of tar. And when you see after one or two days that a bow has formed at the wound, if you take off what you have put on top of it, and apply the ointment healing wounds, as well as the ointment tetrafarmaçon and others,
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you un wrap the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is hardened and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be arranged in such a way that the bow is drawn down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the bone has broken, and cannot be joined again but comes together with a creak, such that there are small pieces of bone, it is necessary for you to clean the wound, and remove all these painful pieces that bring pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula develops at the site or some other form of corruption, then it is necessary to treat it according to what this chapter says about it. And if the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, as with the hipbone or shoulderbone, and other large bones, do not pull it out, for many die if you do; but leave it there until it has腐rot; then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of bruses that come from the sudor
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come back again and again because of the health of the broken, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an ugly sight to see the figure of the limb; and by chance cannot make members do their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take note that we are fresh: if he administers medicines that stick, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcacollege, etc., so that you do not apply any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine that is sticky or with a lot of egg yolk or with honey; and put them on the knot in piles, and bind them firmly, and do not release them for many days; and then remove it, and start again another one until the knots are hard; or you hold it against a well-made piece of flannel; because the property of the flannel is that it makes all inflammation on the limbs go away; and if the knot has already turned into hardness like stone, it needs to be opened, then cut off the excess, or you give it to anyone who can do this, until it is hard, and cure it until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member that is weak after the stay
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break in the bone is healed, and weak and thin members remain, this can be due to several causes: because they were too tightly tied, and were not tied as they should have been; or because he had too many ties, and could not get the circulation going to the member; or because of too much swelling; or because of too much movement at the wrong time; or because he did not have enough blood in his body, so became weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the cors soft, as long as the pains are multiplied in him; and administer baths to him, and give him pleasure and amusement; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great swelling, and pour hot water on it often, until the swelling goes away from the member, and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the dislocated limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after healing, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one should break the member all over again, and many such fools have done this in our land; and these actions are blameworthy, and bring great harm and perhaps death. However, if the nodules and torments are fresh, they should be heated with hot water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as leaves of vismalve, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and you make an ointment that softens, such as a well-made styptic, and you take the musk of vismalve, and confound it with butter of sheep's milk or oil of sesame seeds, and make an ointment out of it; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of colza, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And never let the bones be rubbed continuously and for a long time with damp hands; and always give the member some movement every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the curvature is raised and hardened, as in the case of the stone, it needs to be cut with a sharp knife up to the bone; put on a splint and study for the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it now brings back sense to tarry.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if it is delayed, and the veins swell, and by chance we put them back to their place; for this does not come without pain that we move them when they are swollen: many times brings spam and other pains; however, when this comes, if you make the sick one well, then leave him, as long as the abscess hole is calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as the cure comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the remedies for dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the point of pain.
des mandibules	of the jaw.
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Poc avient que les mandibules soient désalignées et le dislocations d'ambedous est selon 2.ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostéos de lor lüs, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont entièrement désalignées, et pendent vers lo pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by them several configurations.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the ministers wet the chief of the disease, and pour water from one of his hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, where the dislocation is of .ij. parts; and the other two hands should be away, to make it even; and instruct the patient that he softens his jaws, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the wound be kept open until it has healed completely.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And when it has healed, if the jaws have joined together, treat with warm water and oil, gently massaging it; do not delay in treating it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they have healed evenly, and the mouth of the patient clings well, using a softener, place it on a drape made of oil and wax, then gently rub it in;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and his cheeks be between 1 and 2 pillows, so that he does not move or strain either to the right or left, but gently chews soft food, until the pains are relieved, and the jaws have healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then cut lightly what needs to be cut, and do not work on opening the mouth to eat or drink until the mandible is well healed and sound.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not reduced to their places, then there will come fevers and usual agonies, and by chance abdominal discharge, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid only.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know it is a sign of death; and many times he dies who has this, within seventeen days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the coast within the continuance of the chest and loins, and is dislocated never to the back, and feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down soon on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it fast;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head that is on the coast cannot dislocate; if not, and if it is dislocated at all, return it to its place as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it fast, and order the patient to rest as long as he is well;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and so too is the shoulder dislocation returned when it has been taken from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	That the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: either because one of its parts comes out of place at the joint; or it is the bottom part that comes out; and perhaps it is the upper part that comes out, which happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	And don't dislocate behind the shoulder, and don't dislocate inside it for those who have a weak back, because in this case they will surely be hospitalized; and for those who have a strong back, let them dislocates, and return.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And perhaps some men have a pulsation or a break, and they heat the shoulder with a hot applique, and think that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary for you to test this out, as long as you are sure about it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is known when it is swallowed down towards the arm, and makes a difference between the sick and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between them great difference.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a depression, and take care to the arm to the table the head of the shoulder, as if it were a bird's nest; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move at all.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it may be hidden, for you will see it clearly on the table;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not to be used when it is new, or when the patient is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister hold the hand of the patient upwards, then put the splint behind the shoulder, and raise the joint by force to its place; and the minister hold the hand, and extend it upwards, then put it behind; if comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said with the hands after two or three days, let the patient be bathed in warm water; and mild soothing and softening enemas be given, as of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and be given;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then put on behind the shoulder a cloth of equal length, not too soft nor too hard, then put the feet of the patient on the cloth, and hold the hand of the patient;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and others ministers tan the head of the disease, so that it does not move up; this shoulder returns all at once, and you see him if you do as follows:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and let a man be present who is greater than the patient; and let him stand on the right side of his body, and push down his shoulder from behind the patient, and lift up the shoulder above, so that the patient hangs by it;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers draw the hand of the disease down towards the belly. And if the patient is too light, then wrap something heavy around him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the branch is also bent in another way: and it is done as a.i. nail, and not too thick or too thin; and let the head of the shoulder be bent so that it stands on the point of the nail, and let it be held in place;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let the evil one be laid down but that he have a blanket over him and the evil one be lying long in the furrow; then his hand be extended downstream from another side making a form, and the joint will return to its place firmly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if she does not return for all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take .i. beam of an arm long and .iiij. fingers wide, which has the head on end so that it can enter perfectly into dislocation the shoulder, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay it on the top of the head with a blanket so that the evil one does not hurt the evil one, then put it into dislocation the shoulder; and extend your arms on the top of the long furrow, and place the aid on the top of the furrow, and the hand at the head of the arm, then put the arm on 1.i. stone of a stone long, and let it be extended downstream, and let the body hang from another side: the joint will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Then when it is in place, in whatever way, so that you put under the shoulder a sheep's wool even, then put the plaster ready with powder from the mill, with incense and myrrh of uff, on all the shoulder and around, then draw out under the shoulder forward, and tie it on the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain in that way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he drink little, as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal faster; and then drink more after a few days or so, and move him; and if he is firm and has not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or some other cause, you must perform cauterizations on three sides, as with the paste used for cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and after seven days the joint still does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm above his head, then you will know that the nerves at the shoulder have been injured or stretched or softened; and you will know that the joint has never returned to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is toward the loin, and the breasts, or behind, is made by impact, and extension of the arms, and I administer another place; and treat as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes greasiness to the limb, and late it moves, then use the patient often so that those greasinesses are gone away, and return to their first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation from the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Saves that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at the tips and returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly set, for we can see it well and feel it well; and dislocate according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the shoulder with fire, if you can see it open. For the joint is broken, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder from all sides.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must bring it back in the same way that you put in, for if you put in [the shoulder] with an upright arm, there would be much grief in bringing it back; and by chance cannot be brought back from all and all, more so when it is behind; this is worse than other dislocations and is great pain, and by chance comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is there, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your .ij hands; and its arms spread out, and the hands of the shoulder along the side according to the couture around, forwards and backwards, and squeeze the joint in its palm together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, return when it doubles its hand back to its hand, and strong from the root of the palm the side that is turned down.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong extension; and is that two minister extend the arm, and dip them two minister, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide drapeil;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he reaches the joint with his hand, if it does not come from any oil to soften the joint, then bottle up the joint firmly until it revives;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, if it is placed on dry plaster with ointment of wool fat, and is stretched firmly, and the arm is held up to the neck of the sick person, and is left for some days, then it is released.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not move well, then begin again with plaster and a bandage, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it becomes quiet, then bathe and massage him well, and press until he is soothed; or put on the joint a paste of sheep's fat, then leave it for one day and one night, then wash and dry it, and let him enter or bathe.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put on the new one over, and then enter or bathe; and so do .ij. times or .iij., as long as it is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet veil heated with butter, and stretch it out; thus it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand is eased, and its return is lighter than that of other joints However, it must be brought back to its place as soon as it is dislocated, especially when it is swollen or there is a fever.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And let the dislocated hand rest on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and look at it so that he sets his palm against the joint, and presses it until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	All the same, it is necessary that you look to see if he is in the right place; then put the patient's back of his hand on a tray for extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient's back of his hand on the tray, and let him look at the appearance of the joint. If it comes back now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, if the extraction of the spurious ones that pierce the abscesses leaves him with a sore hand, then let him leave it alone for now.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in the right place after a few days, then let the dislocated joint recover itself.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and does not give the patient water until his hands are moist, and cannot extract anything at all: then you know that the nerves are cut or an artery; if there is no other device for extracting by fire but to cut a piece of the case, and perhaps nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, put on the plaster as we have said, then extract it and leave it for a while, then take it off and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no crack, then dip it in warm water and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	No time are the joints of the hand displaced to each side, no time on the back of the palm or the belly;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then are the joints, and push back the dislocation to your pockets until it comes back, then support the head of the two joints, and bend it towards the part where they are joined;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and then let it 1.5 hours, and then put it even that day; and of not the leg, so as we have said, and the dislocation of the day, and the movement, and the connection again; and do this often, until it is tight,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and also do, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and do so as you have done before, until it is well; and also do, when it is dislocated on the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, and there are many dislocations, there is no cure, for the patient will quickly die.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the emissions come out without will, they cannot be held, and often the limbs become soft, or the left or right arm or both.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the eschinee mutates into four parts; that which mutates at the back is called "gilboite":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The following is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from sitting down or percussion or similar things, the ancient manners of cure by great words, so it does not bring much good to all."
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have condensed it according to my intention, and have fashioned instruments in various ways."
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gila bosity that comes before, there is no beginning or healing;"
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and so I say that it comes straight in 1 . 2 . sides, and can only be cured properly if it comes from the back, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and so that the patient is lying flat on his back in an even position, and has had his eyes removed so that he cannot be blinded;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	and then place 1  . 2  . sticks on the ground forming a platform, and 1  . 2  . others under the arms, and 1  . 2  . others at the hips, and 1  . 2  . others at the knees, and 1  . 2  . others at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the 12 sticks;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let the bones be well closed, as we have said, and the mirrour put its palms on the spine, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this treatment, take a table of three feet long, and chip off a panel from the side, and let the patient stand on one side, and pour the head of the table against the panel, then put the middle of the table on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and put the mirror's edges on the other end of the table, and press well, until it recovers its position; and if you see that it does not work, then do it with a turn of the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	and place that same number of torches at the head of the sick person with one hand, and put them between each torch, face up and down, a palm's width apart;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and place each twig. i.e. a pestle, or it turns so that the twigs are firmly in the ground, so they do not move; and between each of them have 1. twig turning, so that the ties turn, and place 2. turning 2 small twigs of a palm long, to turn the pestle.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then place the tie that is between the pegs on the top of the pestle, and the other tie towards the pips at the other end, and each of the assistants turns their tie all the way, and the master places the spike evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on desiccate with a lot of powder, and then the staples, and then the stone of a tablet of 1.5 inches long, that by purple the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then the string of a tie, as we have said, and use the subtlety of nourishment to him until he is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes to the end of health, then administer medicine that softens and eases with the stone that we have said above; and never give a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and never has an appearance in the back of the spine between the two bones, and believe that this is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens, so that one must not have any presumptions: perhaps death will come.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is known that the hip and shoulder joints only come in dislocations, not like other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to the four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of their dislocations inside is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is more distant, and opens up the patient's knees more than the healthy ones, and cannot double the patient's knee on fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and is the neck which is inflamed with abscess hot, for this reason the head of the shoulder comes from it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that to which he belongs, if this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that to which he belongs, if it is well-proportioned according to its development; nevertheless, do not double it in length, and when you make it walk, if it cannot go before, and holds back its urine, and swells the ankle, and when it walks, if it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that to which he belongs behind, if it cannot spread its knee, nor double, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the shoulder is at the level of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	When the dislocation has existed for some time, and it does not remain in place according to its habit, there is no cure; and it only comes about through presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those where the dislocation is recent, and there are three types of dislocation, if you hurry to put the joint back together again and move it within and without, and turn it from side to side; perhaps it will come back into place, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back into place in this way, you must provide very strong assistance, and firmly support the leg with two hands, or a ligature tied around the knee joint;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and others place their hand above it in such a way that they can press down on the joints below, then fasten the ligature around the hip; and others tie the end of the ligature to the belt;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend up and down all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains so.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three things, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then you should put a cure on his back, then tie him to the root of his thigh, and the loop that is out of the crotch, then extend the loop above the crotch, and towards the hip; and
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then extend the other ministers' arms, and embrace the large loop of the troublesome thigh, and extend it in a U-shape: so he will return to his place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must bind the .ij. feet of the sick person together with a strong rope under the .ij. heels, and on the .ij. knees, so that the leg of the sick person is stretched out more than the other two.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then let it be hung from the top of a post, and be 2 arms long; then command 1 minister to embrace the top of the loins, and be others hanging with the sick person who embraces the loins tightly, for the joints will now come back together quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is on the side, let the sick person lie down as we have said in the case of gileositie, and bind a rope properly on the leg that is not ill, and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put .ij. torches on the head and another between the loins of the sick person, so that he is wrapped in fire tightly.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and put wet flagella between, so it does not burn the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the master puts the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put it on a .ie. board, and press it as we have said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is before, if it is necessary to extend the leg of the patient carefully, and according to what I have said; and put the master's foot on the other side of the patient, then press towards him with the hand that is not injured, and pull upwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind, if it is not possible to extend the leg of the patient carefully, and it is necessary to lift it up; however, it is necessary that he is put on his side as we have said in the bed making; then press him towards you with one hand, and pull him upwards by his foot.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it rest on its face, and the limb extended as we have said above, and you must now press down on the joint to the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and let the patient extend his legs, and they will be even; then put on the splint, and strain it with a bandage, so that the ankle does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for three days or three times, then remove the splint and put it on; and if you see that they are even, strain it as before, and let it rest. three times; then remove the splint, and make him walk loudly, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	from dislocation due to old age
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The dislocations occur according to .iii.. ways: that is to say, inside and outside, and behind; and do not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his knees, and if it does not bend at his knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the treatment of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your knees.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his ankle in your hands, and pull it between your knees, then bend the .ii.. legs from the ankle; and other ministers extend his foot, until the genous returns to its place, and the signs are that he bends his leg properly at the knee;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and wrap the plaster on top of it, and make the leg rest in the lap, and join them together firmly. 1 or 2 days later, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, until the members are comfortable again.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the members are not in place, so administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	the heel is never fully dislocated, and never fully displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And these are the signs that the ankle is dislocated, and test before the part where it has come out of joint.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	They should be brought forward if they are light, and be gently extended to their hands when they are severely dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has come out from the top, if it is convenient that you make the patient sit upright, and tie him to his bed with his legs stretched out straight above his ankles;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then train the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left with your left hand; then extend it up, and blow on the foot up above;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this 19 times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it comes back, it is good; if not, then begin the work again, because it will come back.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	If it cannot come back like this, then lay the patient on their back on the ground, and place a long stake firmly in the ground between their legs, and tie the drape around it so that the patient does not bleed.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then put the minister's hand on the hip, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a bandage, so that he lies on the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then extend each minister evenly, and place the stake firmly between the hips of the patient to hold him down while he is extended;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And then set the mirror equal to the dislocation with your hands, and another minister will dip the healthy leg in the vinegar, and the dislocation will return entirely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is fixed, then put the plaster on and make it tight, and shape it, and fix the foot to the leg, and guard against the tendons being too stretched;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then leave it alone for .ij. days or .iij., and if the foot is still swollen, then let it go; then walk after three or four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that term is up, it is not yet certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess breaks out, so that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it is done well and carefully without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the two joints of the foot, so that you place the patient lying down on his side or on a table all straight, and put your foot on what opens up these joints, then press your foot gradually, until it returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and does not open anything, so he sets the foot on a table of .ij. feet, then he draws it up, forms it, and leaves it for .iiij. days, then he takes it off; and let him rest until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound and dislocation occur together, and many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the remedy, and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be arrogant:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and apply cold poultices at the beginning of things to calm an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope for health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if you put the limb back in place now, so that the abscesses may come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is back in place, if you apply cold poultices to the abscesses, and treat the wound, and if necessary, with dry ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the small bones are displaced, and do as we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and keep yourself from going down the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cost you your soul according to your creator, and for the sake of your arm and your heart. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	Here is the translation of the provided text:
