O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have brought you to this book, which is the conclusion of medical science, and I have completed it with its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision, it came to me that I would complete this treatise with it, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is well-established in our region and is widely known from one place to another, it has a well-deserved reputation and deserves no less respect than any other science or art; nor are there any great delays in its progress due to the small descriptions found in books by the ancient physicians who wrote about the movements of the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this error and vanity have come, and intentions are closed and science is remote.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	For it seems to me that I can revive it with the order of this treatise, in accordance with the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come with the forms of the tools for cauterizing, and of the other instruments for the work, with the preparation and arrangement of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no good doctors of hands to be found in our land, therefore the art of medicine is abandoned.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who confronts this matter must rise to the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and their forms and joints and separations of bones, and has knowledge of the nerves and arteries and veins and number of bones, and the movement and moving veins and resting veins, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because, as Hipocrates says, the one that is with the hand is not without and the work is not with it; and most especially in the art of the hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned above should refrain from trying to treat people; thus, I have often warned many of those who confront this art and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who chopped off an abscess on the neck of a woman, and he also chopped the arteries in her neck; therefore so much blood flowed out that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who was treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he brought out a piece of the bladder with it, and he died three days later.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen it called upon to operate, and I saw the dislocation of the patient and the size of the stone, and if they operated on him he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took ill our duke, who had his leg broken, and with the break there was a wound; and the stupid doctor pulls out the break onto the wound with great violence, leaving no scar on the wound, and leaves it like that; and he ordered that he not put it back; and he waited so long that the leg became completely infected and the bones came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislodge his leg; and when I had dislodged it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the ways that corruption entered into the limb were confirmed, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limbs were completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another thing that would shatter an abscess full of pus, and then inflame by the evil of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chaf, when it is purred with melancholy humor, does not come except one touch iron in a place where it can be all opened out what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, very crafty son, you must know that work of hands is divided into II divisions: namely, where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For so that you may keep it, so that the little child does not speak ill of you; If you take your weapons in agreement, and undertake your diseases lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be free; and leave behind you the expected diseases of grief health; and lay aside your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien includes some of his warnings in: "Do not take on a disease that is difficult to treat, lest you be called a foolish person.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the subsequent chapters are ordered from top to bottom, including the forms of instruments, the fieriness of cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter deals with matters of cutting and piercing, with sucking cups, wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapter contains instructions on techniques and the form of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter deals with restoring dislocations and torments, and similar things; it also contains instructions on the shape of tools up to the point where they are sharp, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of help and the harm of each kind.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and most hidden answer; and many wise people would speak of it, and agree with it; and I am satisfied with few words, for I shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire is help to all complexions or it has matter, except for two complexions: namely, complexions of heat and matter, and dry complexions without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, they all agreed that cauterization is great help; but one said the opposite: that cautery is no good for disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and it should not be used for curing diseases caused by heat and dryness; and he who said that cauterization helps a great deal in curing diseases caused by heat and dryness said the opposite: that cautery is good for no disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	For no way does it harm but that which has tried it, and who knows by long practice the effects of cauterization, and the differences in the complexions of men, their conditions and causes of disease, and the season; for we fear not the effects on cold and moist complexions, even though they have diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this comes together and agrees with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that a fire cautery is good for secretions of healing, and of greater goodness than an arding medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member so much as one name.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by moving away, and bring diseases of great healing to the member; and perhaps fire, for its greatness and for the goodness of its substance, does not hurt if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found it by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I beg your pardon for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to deprive you of the secret that is found in fire, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says in proving; or take it into consideration.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that these cauterizations should be made at certain times, and they should be prayed over.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm that overtakes is prevented by the aid of cauterization; and most especially, the cauterization is for necessary pains without delay that cannot wait until the time when greater illness comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, my son, as they say; for in the disease that is healed by cauterization there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so much as they think, because cauterization is a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors which are causes of pain, and does good rather than medicine for the speed of its effect, and for its virtue and dignity.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And that which is possible for the disease to come according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, except if cauterizes are administered at the place where he has little excess and moisture, as cauterizes of density from pain, and similar things, and partial pain does not return but it happened a little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why the cauterizes are called the remedies of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that the cauterizes are worth anything after the medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and the cauterizes are the remedies of medicine because when we administered ways of cure in no disease and they did not work, then let us administer the cauterize, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, understand well that the cauterizes are the remedies of medicine, not because of the intention of the foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Li ancien dirent que cauteres d'estrument d'or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualite de l'or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n'est mie voir car je l'ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c'est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d'or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	The ancient ones said that gold cauterization instruments are more efficacious than those of iron, and they said that the heat of gold is greater in quality and substance; and they said that the heating of the tip does not cause inflammation, but this is not true because I have tested it, and I have found that it does occur in some people; and gold cauterization instruments are more effective than those of iron, as they say. However, when you heat up a gold instrument, you will find that it becomes cold quickly; and if you heat it too much, it melts into the fire; and thus there is sufficient impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you may order this chapter of the heart until it is easier to find the vein.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is useful for the head, and by reason of moisture and cold, and for many ailments that arise in the hair, and in the ears, and for a multitude of pains and headaches and pains in the jaw and throat, and most particularly for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodiness, apoplexia, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the disease should be expelled by a liquid medicine that softens the head in three or four days, according to what the virtue and the age and the habit of the patient can bear; and then wash the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the fire between your hands, and put his hands on some stone; after that put the root of your palm on the root of its nail between its two nails; and let the two edges come together, so it bleeds a little, then heat the cautery which is called 'olivare', from which there comes this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place the fire between your hands, and put his hands on some stone; after that put the root of your palm on the root of its nail between its two nails; and let the two edges come together, so it bleeds a little, then heat the cautery which is called 'olivare', from which there comes this form:
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old man said, "The longer the wound remains open, the more it will fester; and for this reason if it is moved or touched.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one must leave the burn unhealed until the burned part of the bone is eaten away, and then cut off what has been eaten away from the bone, and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said, "One must leave the burn unhealed for as long as possible, and then cut so hard that the humors can exit through the wound; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards, it should be healed and dressed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of treating burns do not seem good to me in all cases, except when there is doubt; and I believe that I should leave it alone; for the joints are weakened by continued motion, as we have seen in other members; and moreover, when the joint of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of a burn seems more healthy and peaceful to me, and so I use it with care until it heals completely.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the whole head feels chronic pain and lasts a long time, the patient should use herbal remedies and treatments called 'cochier', and head rinses and oils and ointments; and if it is done the fire cautery we have mentioned above, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's neck is of strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize it lightly as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have made the fire cautery on each side of the neck up to the bone, as we have said above, and made it at the place called 'vesselz'; then put the cupping glasses; and hold your hand so that you do not see the bones at all: the patient feels too much pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary for the cuppings on the neck to be made thinner than those with which we cauterize the hairline of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	To cauterize the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain in the head appears and spreads up to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed with medicinal poisons, and other cures are performed as mentioned in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then do cauterization according to two ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with water medicine is such that you squeeze a sweet almand from the peel and scrape off the skin and dip it into the shoulder in two places, and then put the poultice made of cotton in butter on it as long as possible; and then, when it has been there for twelve or thirteen hours, take it off and treat with garlic poultice, and leave the wound open for two or three days; then put a cotton poultice dipped in butter on it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of injury as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this one of some burning medicines that I have written or dozed out in the second treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery, if done according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it 'clos' because the head is made in the form of a Clo or there is I poc of curb, and halfway to a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the pain of the cure is burned; and remove your hand that the artery does not burn, which is gone, and run abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in the place, and put it on for III days; then I put wet cotton in butter, and then cure the painful place with injury as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer that is called 'cultellare', at all points, and keep away from capping the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine, as we have said before in the division of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the cautery mentioned before, made with fire, does not suit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign thereon on the pain a line half an inch long, and lift your hand once, and squeeze it so that you do not cover the artery and do not come to the bone; and guard the jaw that mutates when he swallows, and let the rest be as it is, and that the spasm does not come to the disease, and guard the detachment of the blood from the artery when it is cut, or has a great fear and least known by those who are students and proven; and leave the work in its place; but I will tell you how to stop pain when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it comes in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this fire cautery does not suit the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with a knife at the base as we have said, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said, or the extract of the artery, with the cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	The pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ears from cold, and one has applied dissolved medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section on division, and the pain does not subside, then apply this fire cautery, which is called "poins", whose form is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the fire cautery around the entire ear that is hurting, or around both ears where the pain is located at the ear lobe, and moving away from the root of the ear as you have found the sensitive spot; make X points around each ear; after this, cure the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Which must be cured by fire, is only that which moves from fluome, as we have said in the division of diseases; and not to make fire at the appearances which come from scorch and spume of fish.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this appearance of torture which moves from fluome of the head and gargling, and this does not work, then you should make three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, and another a little further down the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and place the fire in the part which is healthy, and let it burn half of what has been heated; and this is the form of the fire:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the appearance of the cuttlefish that we have put in front, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a little thicker; after treatment the place as I said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it in this way as we have said, it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then do IV cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I put it out, which is called a "vessel", as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be cured in this way as we have said before.
de litargie	of lime
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease it is necessary to give the patient many great and pilules medicinals to the brain; after re-shaping the head of the patient, put on the occiput the dye of saffron which is written or made into pills; and this is the way of cauterizing: do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is well here, it is good; and if not, three fire cauteries of the head at the root, leaving space between each one of two inches in length; and cure him as with the others, and if you see them stir, the patient suffers, do one cautery in the middle; and if the business is done, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and let the cauteries which are called 'olive' be done, as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed and cleaned of dirt and everything that we have said before; then, when you wash the head of the patient, make a fire cautery at the root of the hair, leaving space between each one of two inches in length; and cure him as with the others, and if you see them stir, the patient suffers, and let one cautery be done in the middle; and if the business is done, two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and let the cauteries which are called 'olive' be done, as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	For those who have epilepsy, the fire cautery should only be used if they are feverish; first, it is necessary to wash the skull and then to administer other remedies that we have described in the section on treatment when the patient is severe and suffering from fever.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the pain, make gargling and chewing to wash out the skull regularly with good meat; after that, place the skull in water, and perform the cauterization as we have described above, and cauterize the neck and each horn; and if the patient is feverish and suffering, perform the cauterization as I have said for those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the limbs, on the spine of the back and the neck, and make the olive cauterization according to the method that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is ill, then make the fire cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupt and thick moisture, then you make the fire cautery in parts as we have said to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy is the decline of excesses to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he should drink something so that the brain is purified, according to what is before it in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After carefully considering the head of the patient; then make a well-made turban of linen, also as a circle, so place it on the head; and let the patient lie comfortably in bed; after this present the unguentation, and apply hot oil of old castor beans; and let the turban cool down; and do this to the patient once every week with good order, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see him cauterize himself by making many punctures all over his body.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing moistens the skull and then puts cotton wetted with bur and goat's fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes first to the hair by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and make the patient sweat or bathe many times on an empty stomach;
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that he orders him to run his hand over his head, and makes him cauterize his head, and makes two cauterization on the temples according to the width of the head; and guards against a fever rising, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a cloth.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you how to cauterize the arteries and how to cut them with caution, and never cauterize or sear the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	the heart of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and lie in the veins, or cauterize the arteries which are in appearance at the top of the head; and one can see that it is of cold, phlegmatic superfluity, therefore I do the cautery that I have said at the beginning of the awaking of the blood flowing out from the eyes: I cauterize the top, and two cauterizes over the two temples, and two cauterizes where haters lie the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes carefully above the palate with all small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the heart of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you have the medicine according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit, then done three times drink the drug of sickness III; after he takes the head, and make a cautery in the middle of the cautery olive; and do II cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the II points, a little shampoo the hair; and guard the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened with disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cautery that is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	so that this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you do II cauteries on the II points as long as the points are; and do not leave your hand off until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	dou poil qui point l’oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	For the hair that points to the oil, and when they touch the oil, it is done with two methods: that is to say, by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then put the patient to your head; after that, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is also like the furrow of the apple of the ear, and this is the beginning of the mark of the hairs; then put cotton wet in wax and muscatel of persillion on the oil, then heat the cautery so that it is this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the figure little by little many times, so that the scar is burned in place; and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the length of the oil; then gently lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton soaked in milk in a pad until the scorching is gone; after the cure of wound dressing as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after these come the hairs, and the paper is softened then start again the cautery on that middle level, as you did before; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper returns to its natural level, and is even, and do not touch the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical cautery of burning is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make from parchment the shape of a fern; then take French soap and hot water, each of 1/4, and grind them together well; and do it hurriedly, so that it does not cool down again, then spread on the paper with the eyes; and if the disease only comes out in one oil, then must be done in one also, and both at once; and put cotton soaked in milk in an oven; and the patient's joint should be in your hand, and place your thumb on the medicine, and press it little by little each time the patient feels tingling from the medicine, for he feels tingling too like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have had this for a long time, keep the medicine in your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the pain has passed, raise the shoulder up, and test whether you can see the bone raised as if it had been lifted by fire or by incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put more medicine on the spot where the medicine has not worked, as long as your hairs are long and even, and your eyes steady; then put cotton wetted in vinegar on the sore, after which cure the injury called 'diapnis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you must care for your injury with great caution so that the medicine does not cause any harm to your hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft, and the hair pricks into the oil, then begin again with the medicine on the same spot which has become soft from the paper, in the same way as you have done before; after which cure it until it is healed; and this is the method of the powder of mirabille.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and shape, and according to this, their measurements should be taken; and do not go against the natural order of things in this matter.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the treatment of fistulas by cauterization:
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have explained in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit them, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dunk the hairpins in a bowl of melted wax or juice of blackberry jam on oil; then heat the cauterizer gradually; and put it to the scalp as if it were the shape of a feather, together with the hairpin; if you see, then aim for one hair at a time from one side of the head to the other, and if you cannot see, then do it like a tent; but in any case, this that is placed on top should be moved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After compressing the fistula is opened, and treat it with sweat, and dry it out; and if it's closed, then operate, and firmly hold the blade; after place the hot cautery very closely, and keep your hand on the cautery in the part that goes above the oil, so that your hands don't go wild; and place the cautery into the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterizing only just to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start cauterizing again, and if you need to do it more, and let it sit for III days; after put cotton wet in oil on it, and treat the infected area with dry medicine until it is well, and if it takes XL days that it isn't well, then put a corrosive oil on it, and mend it according to what came out in the chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cauterizing fistulas which none of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Hear me on a way to cauterize a fistula, something that no ancient writer has mentioned. After you've opened the site, place a very thin blade in the opening to ensure it is shaped correctly:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	Take a quantity of melting wax and hold it firmly in your hand so that the wax does not move at all, so that the melted wax does not flow onto the oil; and you should put cotton wicks in water or in ash where there is oil: the wax applied thus wonderfully heals the fistula, and cures with miraculous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula has been cured by the cauterization that we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then you should administer a sharp instrument to the nose, and bring the fistula to the nose's own place according to that which is fitting in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	The crevices in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	The mouths of times have had crevices in the lips that are called "hair", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not take effect, then heat a small surgical scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it carefully in those crevices until it comes out; then clean the area with cauterizing liquid as long as it is clean.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes in the root of the throat or in the larynx or at the roots of the teeth, after having made pustules and rot and it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not benefit: then you must have fire according to the quantity of the fistula; after having boiled or pierced the fistula, and holding your hand until the iron comes out at its root, and doing so once or twice, after treating it as we have said in the treatments, until it is healthy; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and cut off the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines, then place the head of the patient in your lap; then heat the cautery until its form comes out in this way that you put a string on the tooth; and insert the cautery hotly inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your will; then fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and leave it for an hour and wash it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the gums that were softened are tightened, and the moisture that had corrupted it is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is coldness or fever, and medicines do not help, then there are two ways to treat it: the fire cautery and the butter cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter if it is such that you squeeze butter from a goat, and the tip in a spoon of iron or brass; after take cotton and wrap over the tip of a tent, and the moist in butter melted, and put on the tooth aching gently and keep until it has cooled down; and so often as its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and see if such wet cotton and wool in butter frozen, and put on the aching tooth, and put on a iron hot as the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Cautery with fire if it is such that you squeeze a iron bar or a brass one, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, so that it becomes cold then put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooled down; do this often because the pain will be intense the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the application of this fire cautery, and then eat it up; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make the cautery on the head as you will, and according to what power you have; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	from the scalp
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold moisture and does not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire on the head as described above, and there are II openings for the fumes to rise to the fire on the other side; and put the fire on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put fire according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it like this III days; and put cotton wet with butter as far as the burning is over; then cure with oil and poultices until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the cheeks and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then it is appropriate that the patient be first voided by soluble medicines; afterwards, a fire cautery is made at the root of the throat, and you must not come up to the throat, and dare only to touch a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, another fire cautery is made at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let be the cauteries which are called 'clavicles' from which we have the form before; and heal the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all diseases of the mouth are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or discharge, but is an old disease, then let him make iij cauteries on the lip in his eyes; and another cautery at the breast between the breasts; and be the cauteries which are called 'clavicles' according to the form which is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make the cauterization by poking at all the cauterization that is called "point" of which the form is as above in the disease of the ears; and let the points be until XXX, or so enter.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After cure the place according to what is said before, and let the cauterization be for three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, for which you make III in a row.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that you will take the disease on his back and on his ribcage; after that you will put the knife which is inside the little finger of your left hand; and if the joint moves inside, then heat the cauterization which has two nails here is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound as far as it pierces to the cost, and comes with the shape of the cautery together three cauteries; and for this is made cautery with the cautery that has three ners, because the figure of the cauterization are there cauteries; and they are the nervi according to the subtility of a tent and this is the form of the cautery which has three ners:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is applied on this nerve for there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting on the fire cautery, crush with a tongs; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, what thing has poked it, then make a fire cautery on the thick part of the cautery, or many cauteries piercing it.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come coldness and moisture until it is removed from its hue, and there are many catarrh to it, and the usual cure does not help him, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Therefore afterwards he shall make three fire cauterizations on the penis from the tip up to the amount of two thumbs, making all the cauterization knife-shaped, and two cauterizations on the two sides as long as the shape of the cauterization is at three angles, and there should be a space between each one so that they do not stick together when they are burnt; and let the cauterization be so perfect that it singes the two parts of the penis, and let the shape of the cauterization be according to this form without any adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterized with a great cauldron on the stomach according to this form; and he who will be afraid of this cauldron, cauterize by piercing and signing on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see with; then cauterize at all the cauldron which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the healing process that we have had before, until he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it comes with pain from cold and moisture and strong wind, until it is greatly removed from its natural composition by the excesses; and the patient is cured of what we have said in divisions, and it does him no good, unless he becomes sick at his heart; and the sign of a cauldron according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, remove the hypochondriacals, there where the cuts of the home come; and have space between each cauldron the thickness of two fingers; and let the cauldron of the long neck of the body, and do not press too much all the cauldron; and let it be burned with great care, and let the patient lie on his back, and stretch his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterices of the cuttle, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all of it, because you would dry up all the body; and let it not come to a boil, for the wound is very small in place, and the wisdom because it can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can discern whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, then feel that the patient does not have very strong pain; and if it is in the capsule, then feel a very intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure has stopped the pus, then it is necessary that the patient be sore on his head; and then sign with your finger where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which is similar to the root, so that there is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I the fire until the cur is well burned, and come to the syphac until the poire is all hard; after the cure according to the cure of effluents until it is sound; and there comes only that this fire cautery use no hard things than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by which these diseases have never been corrupted any time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then one can begin to work again, and it always seems to me that the more you leave it alone the worse it gets.
dou cautere de pleuresin	Dou cautery of weeping
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that you must make a cautery for pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this way: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the longest you can find, dry it, and make it also thick and long as your two arms; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize between the elbow and the neck, and II small cauterys a little down the part that is sore on the beard; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, by declining behind a little; and I cautery under the breastbone, and another above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two cost over the breastbone from behind the cautery that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but make it open as when you are smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no old man used fire cautery like a razor, and he blows it and puts it between the ribs until it comes to the stump; and he suffers pain, as we have said in the incision of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is doubt or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out which cannot be healed.
de la mice	about
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of mice, according to what we have said about the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they have three ways of fire cautery that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is that you make three cauterizations, or four, by tracing according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the mouse be soothed on his back; and another way of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two ends, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and apply the cautery which is opposite to the mouse's cut, or the cuts come from the left side, and let the elevated places be treated according to the treatment, according to the length of the back, and the cauterization is according to the width of the back.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After having poured the two hot liquids so that their sound can be heard on the other side, and then quickly applying the cautery, and so on, until you have done this three times. And if you see, cauterize completely with the cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has been kept for a long time, and this is what must be done to the other one before saying.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Do not cauterize without reason, except in the way that is called "asclepiade".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you have done the cure according to the ways we have said in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you do three cauterizations around the boude [bladder], and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one behind the back on the spine, and one at the pis [urinary canal]; and let the cauterization be close to the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the fire cautery for go long putrefaction, and do not leave the cure of the sick after the cautery; and healing would hurry, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is the claw that we have before mostریت; and what concerns the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is ahead of us described.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints are swollen in the person who is hy dropic, and they are plain of a yellow color, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the index finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning it back.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too much smoothly, so that it would force the yellow color, and be the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After, make two cauterizations on each leg up to the point of the knife; and let the cauterization be long, one in front of the knee and the other behind, between the leg; and leave the cauterizations a long time without treating, because they will hurt themselves; after, treat the others as we have said.
de la menoison	from the hospital
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that remain in it and digest in the stomach are affloated, and cannot be cured by any means of treatment; and you see the patient very ill and of great virtue, so do I make a great cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken before or the cauterization of the stomach, circulating; and four cauterizations around the navel finely in all cauterizations, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the hand, and a cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries in the stomach, for the cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the root, or one or more, and are old and are large cold and moist corruption humors, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does not profit, if make cauterizes: I on the spine of the back, which is all further away from the flesh cut a little and a little in triangling, and I cauterize without cutting the two; and if you think that the stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and we see swell the face, then let the face I a large cauterize on the stomach, as it is said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse at all cauterizes key; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let it rest until it is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnage which is called "thenul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When treating the carnage (thenul), if it is hot, use a fire cautery and burn it until it heals; then treat with oils that benefit it until it is healthy again; and if you treat with a large cautery on the skin, it will be more effective. Do this once or twice, and if there is much carnage, as we have said, use a fire cautery; after treating with beneficial oils until they are healthy; and if you treat with a large cautery on the skin, it will be more effective.
de plaie mal curee	of wounds not properly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate a wound being sutured or opened, which we will describe in its own time, then comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no opening for the wind, and it has become inflamed and covered with pus and moisture, if you give it an extensive treatment, and be careful that you know exactly how much of the treatment is enough.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After you have heated the cauterizer that seems like a razor, and you pour it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the cauterization as long as those corroded and corrupted parts are burned, once or twice, according to the quantity of medicine needed; and be careful not to harm the nerves that are nearby, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes into the belly and intestines, be careful of these parts, and do not do any surgery except in the charned area, and think that it is not dangerous; then cure that area as long as it is healthy, and if the area has healed, and the matter has been dried up for a long time, then know that the area is completely cured; and if the matter has not dried up, know that the area has become three parts, and the bone is corrupted at the bottom; and thus, as one of these things that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys comes with a strong wind and does not respond to treatment from women, then you should make a fire cautery on each kidney from side to side with the clove cauterizer that we have mentioned above; and if we apply it in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and it will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you should make a fire cautery in the area behind the bladder, where the hair grows on the penis, and do so on both sides, making each cauterization as long as one of your fingers; and you should also make a fire cautery behind, where it is needed; and let the cauterizations be clove-shaped according to the form described above.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marriage bed is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are rotten and late in blooming; and when they do come, it causes great pain: then three cauterizations should be performed around the loins, as we said in the cauterization of the bladder, and two cauterizations at the back; and the cauterizations should be claved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hips
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip cavity, and for this reason it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away from the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be sore, then you should perform a seemingly circular cauterization on the malaide [patient] in the hip cavity, and sign in front of the joint as she turns, so that the cavity is within the circle; and if so, the cauterization should be like those we have spoken of for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present with you, make three cauterizations with the olive oil, and let the cauterizations also be complete like all the others; and treat it until it is well.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient with large pills of fetid humors, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, make the cauterization; and the method of the cauterization is as follows: namely, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is according to many methods, some of which are: you make three triangular cauterizations according to this form on the hip joint, and you make them with great depth and width, and there is between each cauterization the thickness of a finger, and you make olive oil cauterizations; you never make cauterizations in the middle on top of the head of the hip joint, for there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery at the circle that we have spoken of before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the flesh around the hole is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is how it is done for sciatica, when the pain persists in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, two cauterizations are made where the patient says the pain is felt, and one cauterization above the ankle three times; either cutaneous cauterization or burning the flesh around the hole; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or four toes or near the ankle, cauterize there with the "poins" cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is skilled in this, let him do more; and if he knows that the pain is in the groin toward the thigh, let him make a cautery with a knife or a circular tool, and give him good care in all your cauteries so that you do not let go of the cautery as much as the cautery burns the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient more harm and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have also seen many who have made a cautery on the heel of the foot, and left it so that the leg was all folded up, and the toes too, and it became perforate and corrupt all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the abdomen in which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sagely said in the cautery of the hunchback, for this is the manner, make it one large and thick as a fingernail, or a little smaller, and space between them the quantity of a pea; and may the between-teeth be on both sides, and they are also like fingers, and there is always a little metal made well; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and hot, and then put it on the chest of the ill person, and turn it around the ribs; and let him cauterize once and let him rest for three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound exposed for a long time; after the healing with ointment until he is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use little of this cautery because of the danger of regurgitation, and few people use it; but this is a good cauterization, which can bear it, and let it be applied where it needs to be.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical cauterization with hot instruments is such that you make a tool with a gap in the middle of which one edge is made of iron or brass and the other of wood, so that it has two lengths, each of which is twice its thickness; and let them open and close on both sides, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After you put your hand up under the hip of the horse that lies on its side on the ground, and press hard up against it; after you put a hot stone in the fire for an hour, and leave it there for a while, and suffer the pain and burning of the horse.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is the same with the horse's hot bit as with fire; and when the bit has done its work, you remove your hand from the instrument and lift up the horse's back with a gentle stroke, and leave it so for three days, and put on butter until what is black with scorching is healed over; and let it be three days before washing. And this would help the horse behind after the treatment of onions as long as it is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, you make an instrument that will rub according to what you have done in the hip, and this is the way of hot stone, and I have written it up or the treatment of correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and living chalc, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take alkaline and live char, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine-pot. There should be a small gap between the two so that the tip of a rod can pass through; and place that pot on top of another well-plastered pot, and put alkali and char and soft water on it, so much as to make two layers above the powders while you stir them with your hand; and leave it like that until it has soaked up enough water and dried out slightly; then take all of that water, and pour it over the char and alkali just as mentioned before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And so, when it is well-moistened and dried out somewhat in the works of medicine and other cauterizations, for it does the same work as fire; and with other medicines, which are well-blended with this, like theriac and myrrh and char with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galiens tells us of a remedy where a honorable man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he muttered it, and said that no other cure was made, and he was healed at one soul time when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you grind the green and fresh lime and dry it, and pound a little with fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it sit; and leave it for III hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bathe as much as his body is a little awakened, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will go away all and be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with such medicines unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dyascorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the end of a goat's horn, it should help much; and it must be done in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and rub it with old oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of your hand and the other which is called the finger.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take a piece of dry goat's horn, and rub it with fire until it is red hot, and lay it on the wool, and let it be until it has cooled down; and do it again in the same way, and do not cease to do it thus as long as you think that it comes up to the knee, and that the pain ceases; and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterize with a goat's horn".
de la dolor dou dos	of the back's pain
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from shaking, or from too much blood flowing out, or from the appearance of cold material spreading out, there is no remedy for any of these things that is worth trying, except for those that come from an infusion of cold material.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	When the patient is voiding foul bile or other stuff, let it be done to him on his back, where the pain is, three lines signed with a inch, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the patient can bear; and let the cauterization be done according to the cauterization called "point"; and if you see, do III cauterizations or IV at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes in small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have tight posture when they stand up, and fear; and you will find in the back lower spine and on the back the appearance that comes on top of the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this man and you treat him, if you use fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery is applied equally to each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, then cauterize between the spines with a fire that is two or three lines long, and let the pokes be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, be careful not to apply fire cautery to gangrene that is in the flesh near a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb, and when the pain comes in pieces, what is called "podagra" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicines, then it is cured with fire cautery in this way: Make the fire cautery between the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you touch on the face of the foot, then make a fire cautery with all the fire cautery that is claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come up just to the knees and to other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each knee three cauterizes or four of each part, with all the olive fire cautery; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand out too long except when the skin of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains come down to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken of in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make a point of burning the skin with two lines; and if there is still pain in the two joints and the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up just to the elbows or just to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and govern well the patient and give medicine.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this good governance and you purify pus, then will you be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syrup
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in the throat, and the belly descends as it grows worse, so that when you look at him you do not see anything; and he uses things that leave his belly empty, so that the end descends from his belly; after that, he sits down on his back between your hands, and orders him to wet his armpits until his fever is gone, and he takes them in your hands, and signs with his hand above the rupture on the bone of the arm, and all in a sign that is like a half-circle from the neck; then heat the fire according to this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it drips with sweat.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then put the balls in their place; and the assistant holds his hand so that they do not turn back; and well operate on the legs of the sick person, and put a tourniquet on him and a serjant on his legs, and another on his feet which hold his hands; then put the cautery on his bones with your whole hand, and keep it firm and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not hit it the first time, so you begin again another so that you come to the bone; and be careful that the ball does not slip when you make the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that by this the sick person does not die, or any other evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is appropriate that the cauterization of children be done with care according to their size, and for adults also according to their size; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter as long as the scorching is bone; after this cure other remedies as long as he is healed, and let the sick person lie on his back for XL days until the wound is well fixed; and it is appropriate that his bandages be loosened slowly, so that the ball does not slip when he goes to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made girdle is brought to him and worn for forty other days; and good rest, so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too loud shouting; and when he has done this teaching, then is he completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here the cure for cutting in his ointment.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, the cautery of cautery is made according to its quantity, and let him be burned according to this; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the edge of the navel and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and with your hand hold all the cautery knife-edge.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first caustics are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, or from shaking or hurting, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cure does not help, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the caustic which is called "poins", and the caustic be made according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is well after the first caustic, it is good; but if not, begin again another caustic on that one, for the habit is that it must run to the member that is nearest, so that you must make the caustics as long as the patient is ill.
de meselerie	of liveliness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mesele are aided by the caustic no more than once by great aid, and most often the disease comes from the putrefaction of the phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l'autre vers lou front a la fin des chevois; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sur le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc'a l'os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s'en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu'il est devant.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Now you can start the cauterizer, be mindful that the disease is just beginning, and if it is healed according to what we have said in the division, and does not get worse or stay the same, and you doubt that corruption will spread throughout the whole body, then apply V cauters to the top of the head: I cut the hair off the top of the head, and the other towards the front at the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind on the nape; and I let my hand move so that the cauterizer comes up to the bone, and as long as the scabs come out without hindering, so that the vapors of the great humors can come out; and cauterize on the skin according to what it is in front. And if it is scattered everywhere; and it obviously loses, so that you apply the cauters that we have said, or chief, and I cauterize in the navel, and II cauterizes on the spine of the neck, and VI cauterizes on the spine of the back, and I large one on the skull and another delicate one, and II on the two shoulders; and II on the ribs, and II on the tendon of the wrist, and I on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the pits of the hands; and be careful of the nerves that run down the back, that you do not burn them; and never apply a cauterizer to the bone of the hand or arm, or another to the stomach bone, or another to the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I make of cauterization, the more I do of aid, and it profits him; and know that the patient feels no pain at the cauterization as those who are healthy feel it, for this reason that his body is already very corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And let the cauterization be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, put flour on his head with honey and other treatments until he is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterization on the member according to its size; and let the cauterization be a little bit entering into the flesh of the cure; then treat with ointments until he is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never does one do cauterization and with the hand and the foot and the back, to the exit of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is osteated; and yet nothing interferes there if it is not known of the members and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of blisters
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is aggravated, and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a fire cauldron perfectly, according to the quantity of the cure of the wound, until the blister is opened, and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils with oil and plantain leaves, and hay and almond wine, each of them in part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for syphilis with fire cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the wart first appears and you have stopped its spread, apply fire cautery to the wart, which seems like a circle, all around the edge of the wart.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet some say that fire cautery should also be applied to the center of the wart; but this I do not believe is good, for then it might become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never heard of this being done successfully; rather, it is better to apply fire cautery all around, with the fire called 'circle', as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the growth that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When anyone has a disease called 'adubelati', and it takes a long time to die or because of the overflow of the illness or because the person is very old and has little blood, or because they are short of breath; then hasten to kill them: then apply small fire cauterizations all around, piercing with them; and then leave it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you saw her pierced at all the cautery, let the cautery be hot in which this shape is:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced the cure, and make such cauteries that the patient feels a coldness in some way that the course of the corruption is stopped.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure until he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another disease is called "corrodens", and it is not something else than a mingling of members, for she mingles the members as the fire dries up the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the light that can be cured together with fire, then heat the clavicles of the cautery small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after the cure on all sides until it is completely healed, and nothing remains of it, that all that is corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the fire-cured spots suffer bruise with oil as soon as the burns of fire are healed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointments generating chapped.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the chapped skin does not heal, it is good; and if not, begin again the cauterization on that which has remained corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this ointment is never once cured with medicine that is fire-cured; but nevertheless fire-curing is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicine that is a fire in division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come to the tip
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Mouth of times comes that at the tips by accident there is a disease which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large ugly thing that bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And these treatments for this disease are according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is known as fire cautery and water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat a metal spike as if it were a feather, making sure to make it narrow with thick margins; then, place it directly on the nail, turning your hand in order to push it all the way down until it reaches the nail's base; leave it like that for three days before starting to apply rubies crushed with salt; leave the ointment on all night, and the nail will fall off and be completely rootless.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the sore with oil of saffron for as long as it remains healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the course of the disease is reversed and it heals again, then treat it with the water cautery: Take a piece of iron or steel, or a feather from a vulture's wing, and place it on the nail and the callus, that is to say, make it rot all around; then put some hot water on it, and firmly hold your hand back, and turn it so that the edge of the piece comes up to the nail’s root, and can find the deep path of the water; and let the patient feel a little pain from the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will completely fall off its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make another one like this until you have removed all those who are at heart, then treat the causes that generate bitterness.
li cure dou trembler	to cure the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shake from cold, or from the quartain fever or other, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizes on the spine of the back, one cauterize between each spine; and one cauterize at the feet, and one on the stomach with olive cauterizing liquid; so will they stop shaking, and will hasten the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Once apparent by means of discharges from the body, or pustules that come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it appears first that one make a cauterize on each head of the pustule: a fine cauterize from the stem of the mistletoe, so that it takes hold of fire, or from the root of the aristolochia long, or with the lente-shaped cauterize.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time are they cauterized in the beginning when they appear according to this way, and they cannot grow any longer than that, but the superfluity which comes from it is interrupted, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times a great disturbance of blood comes from the artery that is cut off at the wound that comes to the skin, or to the incision of an abscess, or to the cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a painful thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever he has any, then you quickly put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it so much that your blood is stopped by your finger, and no more drops; then take fire-olive oil, large or small according to the wound and its place, and set all of it on fire; then take I, or a great or a small according to the wound and its place, and put the cauterization on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauterization there until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if you raise it quickly when you feel your second pain in the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take another cautery from the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other until the pain subsides; and be careful that you do not burn the nerve that is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short of the vein, it can no longer be well treated unless by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not yet been treated, or by firmly tying a thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop the pain; and bind and stretch it properly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tight binding with strips of cloth or other burning things, or similar things, will profit if he does not harm.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Et si ce arrive à aucun et il n'ait mie merdé ni médecine présent, si doit mettre son doi indice sur la plaie de la veine si com nous avons dit, et bien étendre tant qu'il soit renflé dessus la plaie et dessus la veine; et ne remuer lou doigt, mais lou mouille d'eau froide souvent que soit mout froide tant que le sang soit congelez et épaissié et renflé; et fais des enfers en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cautères et de médicaments.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for diseases related to the body's cuts and wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about diseases that require fire treatments, or burning medicines, and the squirts and causes and instruments and shapes of the treatments; and I put this chapter from the lower part of the body up to the waist, and I will go through this chapter with the same middle path for those who are troubled more leichtly than those who are in great pain.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I am beginning this, it is necessary, dear sir, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you should not undertake madness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in many ways people come to healing.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who with their disease have died so easily that they could not bear the pain of their illness and the great evil of their disease; and of this one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these I have told you what they mean, and said: "Wait, I am ready"; and the disease is contemptible.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is fitting that you grant these the honor they deserve, but show greater compassion than covetousness towards your neighbors, and do not venture rashly into the business of others; and in the treatment of your patients, use prophecy and indication so that health may be restored; and he who helps you to acquire a good reputation, glory, and memory, will aid you in earning these things.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear sir, our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and may you strive for the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to that which is before or after the chapter of the cauterizing, which I have devised for you from the top up to the tip, so that you may find more easily that which will be your need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dough of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often comes to infants and when the child cries too much, pulling hard on the head of the child; and never do I hear a reason for it.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease come to adults, and all those whom I have seen die young; and for this reason it seems to me that we should be more cautious in the treatment of it.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was plain with water, and the head grew heavier every day until he could no longer hold it up; and so much moisture gathered between the shoulder blade and the bone that it came to the surface, splitting the skin; and let there be such a distance between them as there is in us, while the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the splint:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has broken the bone, and the signs you see are that the cheekbones are out of place on either side, and the fluid springs out when you press it with your hand, and does not return: then you should make three incisions along the cheekbone in this way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After that, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it like that for five days; then remove it, and treat the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head heal evenly, and feed the patient dried meat in small amounts of moisture until the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you look at the opening of the anus, and the gathering of the needle; because there is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut there where the anus opens, and the thread gathers, and do as you are able; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and be careful of blood loss, so that the patient dies from blood loss and from the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	In summary:
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "catarrah" or "phthisis," and the disease is old, and the medical treatment does not benefit, then the following treatment is good: cauterize with fire.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When the patient's vision is blurred, and the disease is old and medicine is of no use, then the following treatment is good: cauterize with fire. When you have covered their eyes, make the patient raise his head; after that, scrub the place where the arteries are visible with an rough cloth until they appear; then remove the patient's hair from all parts; then look at where the vein runs, and the veins on both sides of the nose are stretched; then cut them with a sharp knife, so that it comes to the bone, and do the same with this one;
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, plug the tube up the artery and cover it with a bandage, cutting too far as I have said above.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is covered, let the blood flow continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the sense, then measure the quantity of the space of III parts, then sign of incision and cut down to the bone; and what is necessary to let the blood flow outside so it is VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no syphac, if the apostemes bandages do not come off, then extract the wound and wrap it up, and the cure with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old man comes, and has catarrh, because of the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and old sores and similar things, he is medicined with the methods of medicine and all that does him no good, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of extracting them is that the patient should let the hairs on his temples grow again, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is not too tight except in some men who are too cold; and if it is re-tightened, then take off his collar from some sheets, then rub the place with any rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l'artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et s'il est subtilz, si la tornetz a la pointe de l'uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantité des II chiés.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then it will not be safe in all respects.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And cut the blood of the VI degrees down to III; and if the artery is large, then bind it with two strong silk threads, so that bleeding does not occur before the wound heals, and let the excess flow between the II lines in this very hour, and then, if you see fit, then cauterize with the fire cautery up to the bone as soon as the II lines are cut; and this is the operation of the muedre oevre, provided that the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is aid for ending moisture: for this is more great aid than for moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For in the extraction of arteries it is fit that one fill the place with fine cotton and put on well-made tent; and when you separate them, so be cured with dry medicines that make char, and with tents, until they are healthy; and if without a cover of the artery there be much pain, then hasten to cauterize by fire, or employ the leach of vitriol and strain it in your hand that the pain be taken away; and if you have not this present, put on the place your thumb so long as the pain cease, and rise the leach of cold water so long as the pain continue, and be extracted as it is fit; and that which is sore and lighter in extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with a sharp edge from two sides, but let the cutting be well-spaced that it last longer on the heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two tools a space of one inch, and then when you have struck on both sides, and you put hot iron on until it comes to the bone, and split the vein in two places; and keep the two joints apart because it is not soldered with this cautery from top to bottom; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come down from the veins that are on the forehead of the head of force, and this medicine does not benefit, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and feel a feverish movement as if it were trembling; and if the hair of the brows is loose and moist so that the hair falls, and the brows are burnt, and scarred by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it the ancient 'cure for contusions', and this is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his or her hair; then he makes III cuts on the hairline evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts is like II two everything cut off the forehead moving upward until it reaches the nose, and the other two are II at II costules above the paper, and keep from cutting the arteries that are at II costules above the paper; and remove your hand from the continuation of the II mandibles, and each wound has III degrees joined together; and you arrange a piece of sponge and mop up his blood, then pour the spatumil obtained from II parts where this form is:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	After the incision that is to be made on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the scabs that are between the II cuts until all the bone is exposed, then do the same thing from the middle incision until the other second one, and then remove this spatumil thoroughly.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you dip the instrument which is called "culteller", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not sharpened, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the edge-biting towards the back at the corner, and the edge-biting smooth towards the bone, and dip it so that it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cover all the vessels that descend from the top at the edge with long hairs until the incision is continuous up to that which opens at the corner, and then another way: make the incision in the middle as much as it takes; and then remove the hair evenly, and express the blood clearly; then put in each incision a little of veiled cotton, and put wet drapings made of wine and oil and honey, and keep so that the abscesses do not come out; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and put there a great deal of cold water, then cure with basilicon ointment made of oil and rosewater, and other cures for wounds, as much as it is cured.
dou reume des eulz	Dou reume des eulz
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is no catarrh of long-standing habit, and you see the hairs thin and small, and a weakening of vision, and burnt paper; and the hair falls out, and at which pain the patient suffers, and he sneezes; then know that from these accidents, those matters and this catarrh do not come except from many veins, and the cure that is given to it, if such is the case, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to re-open his forehead, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another from one side to the other.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And you begin the cut from the left temple to the right, and make an incision up to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when he hiccups; and when the bone is exposed, if you dip all the blood in a sponge, and then wash between the II lips of the incision with cotton wetted with wine and oil, and you keep it hot with a hot cloth; when it is healed, if you rub the bone until it starts to grow again, then cure it with drying things, which cause hiccups.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of flour and three parts of colofone and make a paste; and administer this to the wounds in order to stop pain throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the bulging of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that hangs from ears is one of the four things: grain, beast, stone, or similar thing as iron; seed, as oats, beans, peas; flowing thing as water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it hangs in the ear a stone or other thing that does not fit into the ear, do not put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, do not pour in any oil of violet or oil of sesame, then perform extraction; and when the stirring comes, it is to be pushed with a piece of cloth or wool; and place the ear upside down.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth times comes through with this treatment; and if it does not come through, you must give it a subtle extraction, from which there is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes through with the pinches, it is good; but if not, give extraction to the soft one with a small double edge; and if it does not come through in this way, make a hole of air and bottle up chief of the hole or pierce of the ear very well, and stop what is inside the hole with soft wax so that the wine cannot enter with the hole; then treat firmly, for many times comes through as we have said; and if it does not come through in some way, take glut of what in taking the hairs, and put to some instrument which is right for this, and put a little cotton inside; then press the glut on the stone or something, and treat firmly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not recover from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to split the ear so that it splits, and spasms; and the way of the split is that you first heal the patient from the headache, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, and then put the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small split in the root of the ear to the fat where it depends; and let the split be like a moon, until you come to the stone, then grind it according to your power, and suck it into your mouth; and cure him until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a grain that is stuck and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer the slimy spitumation according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make the incision of that seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make this incision when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with great care and precision, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, when a person has a headache, it is appropriate that the patient use the first treatment of cold water, and wide open the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful about that ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it does not drain well, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it does not drain well, take several small pieces of wood from his hand one after the other and burn them slightly on the fire; and put one of them in his ear, and push up another piece of wood from the ear, and do not stop making these pieces of wood until the water is completely drained, and in this way it will be completely drained; and if you see that, take a small piece of wood, and bottle one of the ears, and burn the other one slightly until half of the piece of wood is burned; then remake another piece of wood from the other ear until all the water is gone, as we said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is a small horn, such as a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large horn that one can feel, then extract it with tweezers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, then extract them with fine tweezers, and if there are none, take hold of the hair by which it is shaped.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It should be tight below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And fill the small channel in the ear with a soft substance according to the amount of pain suffered by the patient, and then suck it out completely; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they don't obey by stretching out the cotton string as I said on the stone; and if it doesn't flow out strongly as we have said, administer distillations that the elders have experienced in the lancing of worms, and you will find them or treating with distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines into all this instrument, from which this shape comes as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if there is silver or gold, open up the small holes, and above them to distil; and to press inside the distillation into the golden instrument that has been well made for this, and when you see him take a razor and wrap it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever you see of your medicines in the string, and let the string be in the ear; then bottle up the razor into all the cotton, and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear is chewed; and have the patient smell it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated on the fire as they are distilled in the ear; and watch that they are not too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear lobes
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have some imperfection in their ears; and this same thing happens to men because of an ear injury or a cart wheel inside the ear, and this ear injury often comes completely into the ear, so that it cannot be seen; and there is no such thing as a small defect, and he can see very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So that it comes completely into the ear, so that it cannot be seen, is a great treatment in many conditions, and in this you must put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has completely removed this sputum from which this form comes:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be it on the front and back completely plain, so that it does not scar the ear; if the operation is a cart wheel or a corral inside the ear, if it holds the subtle stains, and gently scrape it until the cart wheel is all bony.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wart is in perfect shape in the ear, then take a fine and light razor and heat it slightly on fire, then place the ring of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if you feel the wart in the ear, pierce lightly and do not harm the nerves of the ear; then put a thread according to its width, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not make it a daily habit until the wound is healed, or you take a thread and moisten it with rosewater, and powder with vitriolic broth; and if you see the ear oozing, let it drain by covering it with another thread moistened with cera-rose oil that has been made from rosewater and wax, until the discharge stops; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that stop the pain of the ear which are or treat the distillation.
de la char des papieres	of the wood of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Cut the roots of these papers when they are moist and then dry, so that you extend them with pliers and tweezers, and dip them in vinegar. Then put it on the spot with vitriol bromide.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not peel off, then cauterize them with the small, subtle lenticular cauldron, and cauterize them after incision waits to move; and many times repair, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never come back.
de la gresle	of the mud
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Maitres venent en papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et pour ceu est ceste maladie appelee "grandine", et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; l'ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d'une part et d'autre, et c'est legiere chose a savoir; fent donc la dou large, puis l'escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come in papers of hairs one thing that seems gresle in its shape and in its durezza, and for this is ceste disease called "grandine", and is an assembly of moistor thick on the paper above and below; The ovraiges are such: take care so that the grandine mutates from one part to another, and it is a light thing to know; therefore do not make her too tight, then scorch each part lightly, then take her in pincers, and wrap her up. If you cannot cover her without piercing the paper, do not hurt the patient; and if the split is large, so that the assembly has a seam, and heal it until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not use force, for the ovraiges will soon restore her and mar it.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	Et si la grêle tombe dans l'oreille vers la partie supérieure, inversez-la, et la grêle sera à une pincée, et le couvercle et la presse d'un côté et de l'autre ; et si le papier est éloigné par l'incision, cela ne fait aucun mal ; et lorsque la grêle est couverte, laissez couler l'huile salée de l'eau, et soignez la partie qui a été frappée jusqu'à ce que le patient soit guéri.
de la graisse des eulz	of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is made from the webs of papers on top, and this happens more often to children who have no relatives  , it hurts their eyes a lot, and they vomit in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because their tears hurry to their eyes; and so they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep, and their papers become wet above them, which swells and changes its appearance from the exinach that is made from oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press down on the shoulder at your sides and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of this operation is that the patient places his head in your lap; and then take a linen blanket, and set up a tent in the form of a circle according to the quantity of exit between each part, and then put it on him; and press down on your sides from one side to the other, so that the exit is gathered into the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture towards the spine, not being any larger than the wound made at the vein's end; and make the skin complete until you can feel the exit; and in several positions the exit comes out of the cut, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	So take away a whole piece of linening between your sides at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as far as it can stretch; and be careful not to stir in the cut, lest you come to all the spine, lest you spoil it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if it does not come out in the beginning of the cut, then make the cut lighter so that it appears; and then extract it as we have said, then moisten the bandages with water and put them on their place, and draw out the splinters.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the apothema hot, if the healer applies poultices soothingly as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow on paper as opposed to nature, and become dry, if they cause damage to the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as usual tears and softens of papers and albugine, until it is a cause of hair destruction; then the cure is according to four manners: either by fire cautery all together, or by medicine with water according to that which it is before, or by chapistre of cautery, and made by incision and stitching or by caines, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the sick in your chest, then turn the paper of the oil to your left hand; if it is twisted, it is good; but if not, put an needle to all the thread on top; and let this be at a margin of the paper where the hairs grow at a margin of these hairs, and follow the thread up to all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then make in the part of the hair the paper, plucking the hairs together, filling all the space from the great tear until the small one; then take out the thread, and put the paper away a little cotton and a cloth, then sign on the paper an image of an ear, as if it were a fowl's beak; and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	Et s'il a un teil qui a mestier c'on cope une grande quantité de la papier selon ce que la papier est molli; puis fent à tout le spatumile sur les II lignes que tu as signiet, et commence des lou grand larmier jus'à petit; et soit li une des fendures près des poilz naturez en la grossesse d'un raiz, puis boute l'oncine en l'un des II angles dou cour, puis l'escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres à une couture d'une aiguille à tout i fil de laine subtil, et essuie le sang, et fais aerdre la superfluité des filez sur les II sorcilz à tout aucunes choses gluans, si tu vois faire ce; et s'ce non, si n'en aies cure, puis laisse la couture et les filez jus'à III jours ou IV; puis guérit la plaie sans couture de choses séchans et contraignants, car la papier se relève au soudement de la plaie et l'assemblée de li, mais la couture est muëde (si com dirent li ancien), et c'est œuvres sans peur; et si a une autre manière: et est que tu signies la papier d'une figure qui soit aussi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nous avons contéit, à III oncines desévrez selon la forme qui est ci:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then cut those who rise up with small forces evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the tweezers, and this is not equal, then take a needle with thread, and bend it according to the shape; and another thread of different length, and join them together evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have pricked, as we have told you, then join the two lips of the wound with sutures, and heal it until it is well; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then soothe it with cerotine and similar salves; and never happens that the hair of the paper are turned: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about the incision; but the suture in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the cure has some strength, then cure as long as he is healthy; and when the wound is healed, and if the paper rises, and they can no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two bones that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute un fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse li autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a un ou deux ou trois ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et si la chasse est traitée et les poils ne viennent pas avec elle, tu trairas la chasse au désos, sur tout le fil que tu as ordonné, jusqu'à ce que la chasse vienne de travers par le dessus et que tu la voies à travers la vision de l'huile; alors tu trairas la chasse et le fil, et laisse-le tremper dans l'huile et le laisse reposer deux ou trois jours, jusqu'à ce que les poils s'enracinent en leur place et que la chèvre naisse; et si les poils sont petits, tu accompagnes un petit pelage avec une chevre naturelle, et fais-le lever avec celui-ci, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit étiré et puis le lave.
de la porriture de l’oil	From the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or "oil corruption", comes in oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cauterization, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way to deal with it is that you tear open the wound, separate the lips of him, and put linen strips inside, and keep it until it has healed; and it is not right that you use for his treatment things that dry up and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and water or ale and flax seeds are cooked, and olive oil is melted into it, and a tent is wrapped around it, and he treats him from this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment should be that you keep yourself guarded so that it does not harden in the same way as it was before; and the cures that we have said are useful only to treat this disease, so that it does not return in the same way as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the horse that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is dizzi which truly is called "dizziness", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident happens because of wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the way to remedy it is that you press an awl, in which there is a double thread, and insert it into the shoulder with a twisting motion so that the thread comes out on the right side of the armpit, then is raised above all the awl, and the cap is fixed at the wide spud.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper comes back according to what it should come, it is good; if not, then take the razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts where the edges are inside the paper; and let the two cuts of the two angles of the incision that you have fixed be so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has non "I griesche"; then take away the paper, according to the quantity that its edges are beyond the dislocation, from what follows the paper, and then join the two parts that have been removed, and the thread of another cloth; then let us cure him of what we have said about the soft medicines, and of tents, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si le malade vient d'une entaille, d'une couture ou d'un cautère, il convient que tu fasses une entaille simple en retirant les poils des parties affectées, et selon ce qui est dit ci-dessus; puis sépare les deux feuilles d'une tente, comme je l'ai dit ; et il faut faire l'obraie selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les maîtres chirurgiens préparent soigneusement les instruments pour ramener la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade aussi, selon ce qui convient d'obraie et d'instruments dans diverses dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Et si le patient vient d'une entaille, d'une couture ou d'un cautère, il convient que vous fassiez une entaille simple en enlevant les poils des parties affectées, et selon ce qui est dit ci-dessus; puis séparez les deux feuilles d'une tente, comme je l'ai dit ; et il faut faire l'obraie selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les maîtres chirurgiens préparent soigneusement les instruments pour ramener la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le patient aussi, selon ce qui convient d'obraie et d'instruments dans diverses dispositions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this weld is made in a particular way so that the paper above it is welded with the white of oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you stick the point of a sharp tool to weld the paper, and lift it up; and put it on the pinches, until you cut what is on the thin spumil, which is not too sharp nor too thick, so that the patient cannot feel that the sharp spumil burns the oil; and let your incision, from which you scrape the gathered one, be light, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let all that is gathered be well and thoroughly cured, and never use in the salt water and the soft water and the colander; then put between the paper and oil a tent of linen, and put on the oil wet wool in abundance of smoke; and after three days use the collar and the things welded so that it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I know that the nail has two appearances: one is nervous and resembles strong syrup, and the other is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture, which when touched with iron and rubbed with a brush begins to emit a great deal of liquid, and grows larger and larger until it blurs the entire vision, light, and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in one's lap, then opens the nails; and you hold the paper in your hand, then twist the nail with small turns and twists, and lift it up; then take a needle, and put there a hair of horse, or of cow, or of ox, and thread it well; and double the point of the needle a little and pierce it through the nail, and tie the thread to a hair and lift it up, and peel off at the root the slough which follows the nail, leaving only the smooth skin and the small veins, so that in the incision does not come the course of tears by custom; and never twist the nails, unless we have said; then peel off the slough where there is hair, so that remains this form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l'incision giete en l'oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc'a l'autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu'il i covient tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and tear it, and that the prunes are not pierced; and after the incision pour a little string into the oil, and a ring made of lead, and leave it until the next day; then heal who needs it until he is healthy.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail carefully, and if you see that it is not shrinking at all, then put pressure on it, so distil from your mouth into the ring made of lead and red ring and string, and stop the oil until the next day; then start again with the other treatment according to this same way of working, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to it in the oil, like an abscess, then the milk, and first cure the abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm hurts in the oil by great harm, if you suspend it for a long time, and cut off part of it, and not all of it, so that tears do not come; then distil in the oil a red color that is made of lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the skin that grows on the apple
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of certain men nais sometimes a red skin, and burn the apple and restrain it on paper and turn it to the wind, and seems like a rose of balaster; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in salt water, then copes all the skin, and goes cutting little by little at the root, and do not cut off the hair, so as not to damage the oil in the work; and let the incision of the spatumile that we have spoken in the incision of the nail and small forces of where one oste the sebel, as it is formed after this chapter shows; and when the incision is finished and all the skin is cut, then employ the oil of wine or you i distille a red color and similar medicines corrosive, and put on the oil to the wind with aback of oil, so that it be sure of an abscess; and if it does not delay anything, and the hot foot rises, and you doubt an abscess, then leave the oil and cure the abscess with soothing agents for hot feet; then return to your work until it is healthy, and in this way copes the skins are laid in the oil by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless it is necessary that you adjust the cure of each weak oil of the natural path; and of the path by accident, in work with iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this member suffers that work.
des voines des eulz	of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Some veins are red that are covered with oil, and tolerate its sight and weaken the oil every time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	So that is why it is necessary for the first one that you see the oil, because some veins are red and are covered with oil, and tolerate its sight and weaken the oil every time. For this reason, first command the patient to put his chief in your hand, then suppress those veins entirely according to their wisdom, and make the incisions subtle according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let two incisions be made by degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cet ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot manage to tighten everything at that time, then make a paste on the oil from soothing things and let it sit for several days until the pain is relieved and the abscess is warm, then start again according to this method described above until it is healed; and this is the way of tightening them.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the pipe
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The fistula of the oil: when you treat it with hot cauterization and medicine as I have said above, and it is not healed, then cut it on the abscess, where it must die, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, then apply the 'spiky tool' to it; and be made from one end to the other, and be sharpened as a file:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put it on the place where the bone is corrupted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you feel that the corruption has gone; and do this once, then return to the place of dry medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the leg is not swollen, and the hound's cors does not change, and it has not broken out with pus nor does it stink, then this means that it is well. But if this does not happen, there is only one other way to bring the fistula into the nose according to this form: namely, that you uncover the bone for a second time with iron and strong medicines; and when it is uncovered, take care that the iron stays in three places, and that the furrow is made shallow up to the top as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put the iron on top of the bone with the limb, and keep your hand away from the oil, then turn everything back over so that it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain in his nose because his hand is on his nose; and when you have returned to the place where the dry medicine is, as I taught you, and when the hound's leg has grown harder and the matter has gone into the nose, then this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	de the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	de the issue of the oil
dou derrompement de toile uvee	and then tie a bandage around it, and then wrap it in soft cloth; and then put the oil on it, made from resin, myrrh, and incense, and then strain the oil, and then apply it with bandages and cloths; and the way to make the bandages is that you twist enough soft cloth, and double each one into four; and then put one on top of the other according to the amount of cloth needed; and then strain the oil through a hard cloth, and then start using the suction cups again without hurting; then remove the suction cups and leave the oil strained for a day and night, and if it thickens, you should strain it more; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see that the oil has healed, it is good; if not, then start applying the resin and cloth and bandages and suction cups until it heals.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the woven veil, then cut, and comes up from the paper as if a grain of resin, and is expected to be seen; so if you cover it with a view, the weavings are such that you push a needle into the root of the part of the sown until over there, then push another needle where there is double thread from the part of the armier; and let it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the arrangement; then cover the place of the double thread and tie one part of the uve around, and tighten it well, then extract the needle and put on the other oil wet in honey; and leave it until the thread bumps with the uve, then treat the oil for comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound by a piece of cloth each part of a circle as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have a good appearance, then pierce them with a fine needle that comes from oil in perfection, and run the moisture albinized and dry the hairs, and enter so quickly; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bow of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is nothing but a bow that is assembled in oil, resembling water descending, and not being water; and the manner of the appearance of dislocation so that you sit the patient on II seats apparelled and upright, then take the chief between your hands from both sides, and move it as you see the bow come up to your hairs; then pull it off firmly, and do not descende and be broken the light, and see the patient's things so as it should; and if it does not descend, know that it is water, and the descending of the bow is not apparelled as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you put the patient between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and make an incision in the corneal layer along with the membrane and crown, until the bowels come out; and when they come out, pour into the hot oily honey or fenugreek soup, and cure from another cure as long as it is well.
des aigues de l’oil	of the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	have the appearance of needles in division, and what is appropriate to pierce; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you put the patient between your hands, away from the light of the sun, and press the oil well; then take the paper of the oil with your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or with your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument on the crown by its thickness in that clear part of the oil up to the smaller limbus, and pour the instrument which is called "almagda" well, and turn your hand around until it pierces into the clear part of the oil, and see that almagda comes to the hollow thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be in perfect measure with the space which is from the plum-pulp up to the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal layer, and then put the instrument there where the aigue is.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is lying down now, then see the patient before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a short while, and having placed the instrument in his oil, and when it is firmly lodged and does not move up, then gently extract the almagre by turning your hand little by little; and then put back into the oil a little bit of gold, and remove it from there.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put by hand the oil that is left or another wet thing in oil with a lot of turpentine, and bind it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our group, let us place on common ground with a lot of turpentine.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagre cannot enter into the oil because of its hardness, for there are many men who have very hard hairs, then you must squeeze the instrument that is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n'aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l'uevre apareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc'a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprouve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc'a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faisses ceu en l'oure de la cure ou aprés l'incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If an abscess breaks out before the seventh day, then let the oil be applied from the seventh day onwards by one who soothes an abscess; and when it has calmed down, then remove the poultice and place a patch on its face to cover it for that day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then little by little leave the house and become accustomed to it; and know that no doctor should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Land of Egypt, who told us that in their country a certain water is made to boil, which sucks up the liquid, but I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor do I find it in any of the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the appearances of the shapes of almagda, so that he who does not know them sees them as if they were made of stone.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this mixture of subtility, and the behind three angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the horse's head on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	There are times when the horse's head or neck is broken in various ways, so that it seems like scorpions from the foot of the foot; and if there are any such or there is a broken horse with a good color, and if there is a black horse.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In the case of those horses that are broken but not entangled, it is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands toward the sun; and open his nostrils, and insert the hook into those horses, and tighten them firmly; for one can hold on to the delicate bone with the sharp hook from one side, as long as you know that this horse is all boned.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if you open it all with the sharp and light instruments, so that nothing remains; and if he rises up without any pain or ache, or if there are any malicious abscesses, then hasten and cauterize them so that they are all closed and boned, and then cut off or extract them easily and quickly or pierce them.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If there is a headache, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is okay; and if the moisture penetrates as it should, know that there is no toothache in his bone, since the instrument does not cut: then you must put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and tie it tight with your hands, and leave some space between each knot or more or less; and put the child's hand on the thread at his power, and pull in smelling until it comes through his nose into his mouth; and many times do this to the child when he is at school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the head that comes through his nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and feel one after the other as we are doing with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it so that as long as you know the new wine has corrupted the barrel, then treat the child, wash the blood, and moisten the child with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the neck right away as before; make it so that III days or more, as long as the ointments corrode whoever is delayed from the barrel; and then put a plug of plaster in the neck for some days until he is well, and if there is need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, where they distill oils and medicines in the neck:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling an open lamp, like a plug, and conduct it so; and if you see, make a closed plug, and be the instrument flat for purging the head; and I have many in the head to hold it when they heat oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	the horse's back over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Several times the horse's back caused a disease called "telul", and it grew and became very large, so that one can see it in the eye; and for this it is necessary to cut the head at the beginning, and then burn the bone completely, and then put fire on it; and if it is delayed to cut it until it becomes very large, then take care not to touch it with iron because it is a scorbutic wound; for when one cuts it, great evil comes to the patient; and the wound is of light touch, not of red color, and you can see that you can completely cut it, if you empty the patient and cut it without fear, and heal the head with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck is cut and seared
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is known that when the soluions of the continuance come into one of these cartilage sovereignties, it profited little, but that in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to consider if there is any cause; so regard the wound is fresh in all its strength; and then join the two lips together at one seam, then heal them as long as they are healthy; and if the lips are torn on both sides, then it is necessary that you peel off all their skin as long as they heal, then join the two lips together at one seam, and bind it, and powder with dragon's blood powder, and incense broached; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of ferment or any other plaster then, and leave it to make it come out by itself, then cure with ointment as long as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to sew up an incision: so you gather the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the incision of the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	of the lips: at home, make a hole in the middle of the lip, resembling grains of sand, smaller and bigger; then, you must turn the lips, cut each one with a knife, and wrap them in cloth; then employ the vitriolic paste after scraping away the scabs; and then let it be, and cure the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	often times grows hair on the gums, which the old call "albulus"; if it is necessary to hold them with pliers, and cut off the root of the tooth, and let the blood flow; then apply vitriolic paste, or other powder that binds and dries; and if this hair comes back after the incision, and often times comes back, if they are covered again, and cauterized: if they do not come back after cauterization, and these are the shapes of the tools to cover them.
des sordens	of sorrows
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	of sorrows
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you wait to extract it as long as you can, for this is not good to do; because it is a very high substance until one has no excuse to extract it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	And then when the patient is constricted by the traktement, it is necessary that you are careful with the toothache.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain leaves the patient, and he should be sure that it is a healthy tooth, and he has the right tooth pulled; but nevertheless the pain does not go away for this reason, until you have carefully scraped under the tooth with a sharp instrument on all sides; then he moves it slightly to the left or right, little by little, until it is well loosened, then he tightens the pliers well; and the head of the tooth in your good mouth, between your teeth, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take one of these instruments and knock it in slightly from each side, and move it a little; do this again until it comes out easily.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the jaw is tightened and swollen, fill it with cloth where the pain is; and if it is held firmly with pliers, so that it does not break when it is pulled, and carefully clean around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And do you well in mind that you do not break it, and remain a part of it, and return to the patient by the malice of the root greater pains of the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be careful that you do not do so as the ignorant surgeon does, who, by his haste and audacity, breaks the carriage sometimes, and does not administer any of those which we have spoken of; but brings it about sometimes by the quelling of that great disease for the roots from which they come out, or by the carriage which they break, as we have often wanted; and when the jaw is pulled, wash the place with wine or ale and silk; and let them run away without pain coming, so often comes, if you employ the place of vitriol; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, for which it is necessary that the teeth do not touch each other, are long in length and thick in diameter, so that they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be thick limbs so that they do not bend when pulling, and let them be well made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold the tooth in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root moves when pulling, it is necessary that you put cotton wet with oil on the place where you pull or rub.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the roots are smooth, for then the pliers that are called 'algefri' [smooth-toothed] seem to be a saw; and let them be made inside like a grindstone, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the whole thing around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'alhalith' [palsy-tooth], that is a saw; and this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be it small or large so that he does not break, and his root jumps because of this, it is good; if not, if you help with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps himself with this instrument that has two heads, from which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front in the rasion of teeth, and this instrument which seems a pair of large pliers, from which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and this instrument is out of the way that it cannot break, and know that many tools of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not accounted for; and the wise masters carefully examine their own instruments, according to what their works and the illness show them, because there are many diseases where the old do not teach about instruments; and if it does not break the chariot or other bones on which it rests, if he seeks the right tools, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be large and well-fixed to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; then return it to the place of medicine appropriate for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then use all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not appear to be in line with the natural shape of the jaw, and the form is ugly, especially in young women, you must know that the root is not in its right place, and it cannot be sewn or filed; then cut it off; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is like a small pick, and which is made of iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And take the cap and hold it firmly with your hands because of the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it seems that it can be filed, then use a file of this kind:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime with which we make needles; and in a lime bite and bite gently with the hand every day so that it does not move until it bites; then, at the end, to any razor, and its edge is too rough and it bleeds the tongue, then you have to sharpen the尖锐さまで so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or destroy speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth come loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the teeth come loose from each other, whether by striking or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on anything without vomiting, and you have treated them with medicines that constrict, and it doesn't work; then you should restrain them with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold threads never move; and make the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the amount of space between the teeth; and if you notice any gaps, take a thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the bridge between the teeth, whether there is one or more, until you tighten it securely up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start again at the covering end, tightening gently and securely so that it doesn't move; and hold the ligature to the root of the tooth so that it can't escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the heads of the threads with a pliers, and assemble them, and run them between the healthy tooth, and put them so that they do not scratch the tongue; and then leave them so tight as it can stay, and if they loosen, or the thread breaks, fasten it with another thread; if it stayed, and served so for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the insertion of the II healthy teeth, and the II bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then, if the tooth is loose, put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not meddle with those who are not skilled or tolerant, and never make the shape of a tooth from ivory; and put it back in its place where it is defective, and fasten it as we have said, and let it stay and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the tongue of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Once there was a tongue that came out of its socket, whether by nature or by accident due to a wound; and the ovations are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and put his head in your lap, and loosen the language; then cut the large nerve with an awl, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or no pain, and it is due to a sudden wound, then grab the awl and cut the large nerve; and be careful that the incision is not too perfect, so that the artery that is behind; and when you have done this, if you lift up hot water and cold water, and put it on the tongue for a tent of linen; and scrub the sick person every night, so that the lees cannot close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the pain comes, then put vinegar on it; and if he doesn't go away, then cauterize with slow fire, which is good for him; then heal him with other treatments until he is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a red or black or hard color there, so that the patient doesn't feel it, then don't touch it, because it is leprosy; and if it declines towards blenchor, and there is moisture, then put the oncine on it, and make it with a thin scythe, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if he does not go away to your help, then put vinegar on it as long as it is stained, and then return to your help until you pull all of it; then raise his head from there and from here, and heal him with other treatments until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No time comes from within the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "II amandres", and when you cure them, as we said in the division, and they are not healed, if take care: that is a hard-to-heal, small-sized, and pale warts, do not touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either for fear of blood loss; but let it be until it is dead, and then you will remove it, or it would break by itself; and if it is a pale color, and the root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first look at whether the abscess is hot and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the patient sit in the sun, and his joints be in good position, and he opens the mouth and puts his fingers between his teeth, and presses the tongue towards all of the instrument, so this is the form; and also be silver or gold as fine as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And you press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if take the scythe and put it in the ambrosia, and move it strongly at the top more than you can; and do not move anything from the threads with it, then the cap to the instrument, of which is the form, that seems a force; and nevertheless the heads are curved, and one place another, and are very useful, and is made of iron in or of anvils:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, if you take the cope as pliers, of which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be sharpened on one side and not on the other; and when you have caped one of the ambrosias, if you cap the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and cold and easily, and let it be stayed until the blood has stopped, then gargarize the patient with wine or cooked pomegranates, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then cure it as long as it is healthy; and never let others apoplexy in the throat except the two ambrosias, if they are capped like the two ambrosias.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicated a woman with an abscess that was lodged in her throat, namely a small abscess; and I had it very tightly closed all the way up, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had delayed any longer than one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high up that it had been opened two times through the two openings where it was coming out.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	So I quickly did so, and inserted an onion into one of them, then drew it out, and in drawing it out a little bit of blood came out; then I inserted the onion into the abscess again, and poured some of it out, and there was no more blood coming out; but at that moment the passageway in the woman's throat became blocked up, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time; and the abscess recrossed itself, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it was very large; then I sewed it up and cauterized it inside her throat: so she stayed still without growing any worse; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the fever rises from the eye, and it is gone and far away, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is big and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the cheek abscess is eased and thin, then you should cut it; and if it is round and united and not far away; and it is bloody or reddish or black, then you should avoid the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	It is necessary, therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blenchor and remoteness, that you cause the patient to sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue onto the instrument which we have mentioned above; then cut with the sharp edge at the corner of the eye, and chop it off, and cut with two instruments as I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the surplus that is beyond the natural term; because if you cover more, it will grieve the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two mandibles, and cure as long as it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of covering, then you should use fire to cauterize the pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of fire cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in your lap, and then press the tongue to the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and confound with sharp water so that it is not too thick or too clear; and by this employment of this tool, from which this form comes:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place a hairstyle where one puts the medicine, as with a spoon, and put the instrument that we have said or fire cautery on all the medicine on the vein; and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva and muscle juice run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and burn him; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the vein for half an hour, until you see it darken and the medicine bits be calm; and if you need to renew the fire cautery, do so, and after the cautery rinse inside with cold water, and gargle as long as it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective for incision than cauterization; if it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them in a pot, and pour it easily and boil it; and the pot should be very clenched with strong earth, and put the instrument that is chained according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it is of silver or gold, and let one of the shoulder heads be inserted into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the vein through the tube until the vein is dead; then start over again, often until the vein dries up, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess, because many things have happened; and do not do it unless it is at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a knife and put it in the patient's mouth a piece of fur, so that the mouth does not get too hot; for the piece of fur does not make the vapour of the wound go into the mouth, and this is a good treatment together with healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a piece of bone or fish bone, or nothing comes out; so it is necessary that you pull out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can feel the thing; and if what does not open up for you and is put back into the throat, it is necessary that you induce vomiting in this way so that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will come out with the vomit; or the patient swallows a sponge piece, or a navel piece, or a lettuce root, or a dry bread mooceel; and you put a string on it, and then you swallow it; and when it comes to the place, if it hardens, then pull hard; and if it does not come out with what we have said, then take the instrument of plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And be the instrument curved to the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the head higher; and beware of touching the epiglottis, lest all go down, or push the bone in; and move the patient so that the instrument seizes on something; if he swallows it, or pushes it forward to all the instrument evenly, until it is pushed out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine is good for the blood, as I said in the division, through the cure of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the sun in the throat of the patient, then you press the language to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, let it run to all the little nails, or small pincers that are worth something.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a dog's teeth, and put them in the throat of the sick person, then pour or blow out the dog's spittle, and do it often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient is infected with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full bowl of cold water, and dip the mouth, and move it with his hand often; and if soon as he feels the water, spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if he does not spit as we have said, then suffocate the sick person with asafetida, using the instrument I spoke of in the respiration of the herb; do this many times, for it will make him want to spit.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of respiration as I have said: you should squeeze the herb into a pot where he has coal-black phlegm, and let the smoke come out through a hole in the center, and pour your respiration onto it; and the sick person shall put the root of the dog in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to the throat; and the throat will soon be hot, and if he does not spit, then begin the respiration again many times; and let the patient suffer from thirst, and drink salt things and nothing else, and no water; and then, by this governance, it shall be done.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument is such that one can treat the tongue, if one can see it, as it resembles a pair of pliers for entering into the mouth; and has the appearance of a beak and has sharpness from lime, so that whatever it takes hold of, it does not let go; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Mouths resembling abscesses are, according to what this reminder comes from a and b in this book, and they differ in perforation and in incision; and it is in two ways, one is in its own shape, and of what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where they are in the neck.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the abscess at the top is different from that at the base, and the abscess in the jaw is different from that in the joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if at abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the bowels are dead according to their end; and if of such that one must pierce when they are healed, and do not die according to their end, as the abscesses that are delicate joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from delicate joints, and one leaves it as long as it is rotten within, by chance if the ligature and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, so this is a cause of contracture in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is in a principal limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will hurt the principal limb; or if it is in the foundation, then you pierce it so that it does not die, and do not pierce an aposteme that has been crut sens digestion acomplie, for that which is in the foundation may be rotten completely, and be alongied within, and come to fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	Et covient que tu saiches l'oure de la perforation de l'aposteme qui est meur selonc l'acomplissement, et c'est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l'amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l'aguisement dou chief de l'aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faiches seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l'aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n'a point de ploieure.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess which is deadly according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and discussion and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation where it is most dependent on the abscess, and where it opens; and let the perforation be long of the neck, and let the abscess be in the hands or feet, or in joints and backs and arteries, and in all of them equally where there is no plique.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, you must leave the drainage until it is finished with the complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce the skin before this, if you delay the course of the blood from him, and it is filled with dirty water; and perhaps it hardens his lips and deepens the pit of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if an abscess pierces according to the width of the body, according to what the limbs require.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring forth small abscesses, small punctures; and in large abscesses, large punctures, and many splits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such that they have had a knot, and it has opened, as if it were a cloth, and has softened, so as to make them like bubbles: and if there are such that they are split into three angles, and if there are such that are coped like a fig leaf, as if it were an abscess of the angles; and if there are such that one makes a circular size, and other sizes and similar coping.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Those who do not have an apple of the ear, if the abscess is superficial, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a great amount of pus, and you pierce it, if you do not draw all the pus at that time, but draw some of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing more; do this many times from hard to harder, until the pus is completely drawn; nevertheless the patient is of weak virtue, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old honourable decrepit.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Eschuez donques cet onguent par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, s'essuie la plaie, et regarde si la plaie de l'aposteme est petite; et si c'est une tailleure plainne, alors amenez-vous des bandages de lin ou de coton vieillot; et si c'est un grand aposteme, et il y a beaucoup de perforations, alors il convient que vous boutiez en chacun une bande de sorte qu'elles viennent l'une contre l'autre; et si tu as coupera en l'aposteme une partie du cuir, et tu l'as couverte entor, alors il convient que tu la remplisses de coton ou d'une toile de lin sèche et sans humidité, et la lie jusqu'au tier jour; puis lave-le, et le guéris d'onguement tant qu'il soit sane.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is an evacuation of blood when it comes to your work, so bring cold water quickly and easily, and wet the cloth, and place it on the evacuated part many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the evacuation of blood persists, so bring government and remedy, and the powders that I have said to hand in this book, and if it is a wound, and the nerves at the roots are irritated, let you put on blankets and drapes wet with wine and oil warm; and if it is gangrene, and the roots are fleshy, let you put on drapes wet with water and oil, or with wine and oil cold for three days, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and wash and cure it as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what one must know universally in the treatment of abscesses: Or I have told you how one must go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the paste.
des soros	of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	The little sores come out like small abscesses, and they are handled by us so that they form webs, just as the palm of a hand does, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are greasy and similar to poultry, and there are also some that are hard and bony at the edge, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so is that you experience all the instrument called "entrimoire", from which thing this comes later on, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and it drips from above the long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, if one leaves the hair that contains the moisture, it comes back as soon as you leave it; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if there is any; if not, in water and salt, and employ the wound, and leave it until the next day; and if you have to wait longer, delay no further.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And since you've begun the cotton treatment, as before, on the second day and the third, as long as you know that it doesn't stay in place overnight; then treat the wound with ointment to suit, as long as it heals.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds a lot of pus, if it follows this form, then let it long; and pour your vinegar, and the scorch on all sides, and put all your cure against the cot where it is; and if the artery does the opposite, do what I've told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make the abscess if it is bony, and the dressing and the cure as I've told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the bony abscess and the moist one, for the latter is lighter in blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there are any of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and these same abscesses that I cut on the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard, sharp, and white as a stone, and couldn't break it; and had one been struck, it would have made a wound as well as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	En autres apoptes venans ou cheif, fuer que ces qui vienent as cheifs des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.
des scrophules	In other apoptes coming from the head, let those who come to the heads of children and the roots of ears be opened as much as possible at their most dependent place, so that the bowels may be discharged; and treat them as it should be.
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times has a cyst come to the throat, and broken out, and caused anger, and never comes to another place or course, and is bitter, and is infected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every scorbut is properly inside its rib, as the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scorbuts are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n'est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l'artere ne au conduit, et n'est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l'escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n'eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	In the treatment of burns, instruct the patient to let the burn heal on its own, and if it is painful, apply vinegar or powder that stops the pain, and extract the burned flesh; and leave the wound until the swelling subsides, and the wound softens, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has healed, if there are any small sores, examine your index finger to see if they have come away, if so then chop and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large sore at the root of the scar, you must chop off the sore at its root, but leave it tied with a strong double thread, and let it hang without doing any damage; then dress the wound with dried cotton soaked in Egyptian balsam, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you chop off all the sore, then join together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, and do not delay doing so because of the size of the sore.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if you can get to it, and cut off its root, and pull it out forcefully, and sew it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Celles scrophules que tiennent superfluité, perce lai ou il apre meure; et la perce ensi com celle avant dite, en dependent, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblanches choses, si qu'elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mondée, si la cure d'oignement enjanrant char, tant qu'il soit sane.
de squinance	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	They used to talk about the operation of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the text of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have laryngitis, the 'epiglotte', which is the flap at the back of the throat, should be removed; and one should not seek aid from anyone, for all the veins and the ponomad of the sick are close to the tongue, in the mouth, or in II amandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sick person is in the channel of the ponomad, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the obstruction that comes from strangulation does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to cut the epiglotte, that we cut it III or IV little cuts through, between the II circles or by the quantity of the cut of the syfac, not in the cartilage; and they are appropriate for the cutting of the epiglotte so that there is no need for a saw, and the vessel is long in order to make a cut.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Et si le maître est effrayé, il faut qu'il étende la peau du cou à toute l'étendue, puis fende la chair tant qu'elle touche le bois; et évite les vaisseaux sanguins, s'il ne voit rien, et ensuite applique le siccatif, comme nous l'avons dit; et montre par la section du fluide de la gorge qui sauta loin du lieu qui est rompu, et par le défaut de la voix; et laisse la plaie ouverte une pièce.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hour has passed when one doubts strangulation, then join the two lips of the wound to the chest, and the whole throat is covered with cartilage; then administer medicines that produce cheer, until he is well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucius says: Do not perform this procedure unless the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the defect causes the voice to escape.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	So then cut on the epiglottis lest that the sick man should choke, and he breathes through the wound, and so is guarded from death; and because the elder commanded that the wound should remain open until the evil of the disease was passed, and it passed in three days or four; and then he commanded that the wound should be sutured and healed, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took a scythe, and placed it in her throat, and cut part of the windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and I found her also as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood which had come from it, and surely it had not been cut by a vein or an artery, but the blood was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was well; and there came to the damsel nothing but that she became red in color, and returned to her condition; so I said to myself that in the surgery of the epiglottis I had no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	An aposteme in the throat is called a "hernia of the throat," and it is a great hernia of a jaundiced color, especially in women; and it has two ways: natural and accidental; where there is no organ.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is according to two ways: where one seems like a fat flesh, and the other way seems like an aposteme that comes from us of the arteries; and there is fear, and it does not at all operate on fire except in that which is small, and test and search throughout the entire intermitter: if you find it also as I say, like a fat flesh, and cannot be cut at all, if it is cut, like we cut ourselves, and treat it well, as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	For us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to explain this, which I will now describe; and here it is necessary that I make the distinction between us and an outlet.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that an outlet is hot and feverish, until the boiling is done, and the perspiration is complete; then rest the heat and the fever.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With our body there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it heals itself, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the skin, and begins also like a seed, and grows thick; and are according to their appearances, or fat, or moist, and many colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the body, you must first test and inquire into all the instruments that are called "entromissoire", according to what their form will be or the paste that is made after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of examining abscesses is that you squeeze the moistest place that you find in the abscess, and slowly turn your hands little by little until you feel that the instrument has hit the core, then pull out the inserter, and take care not to jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the running water is recent, let it be of a certain color, as I said about other abscesses; and if after the inserter comes out without moisture, know that it is greasy, so you do it in cross-section, and take it with tweezers, and burn it lightly on each side, and keep the liquid in which it lies until you get it out whole; and if you cannot get it out whole, take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains nothing, it comes back to us many times; and if it remains a little, and does not bother you, so employ the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on warm things, and heal it with other remedies until it is healthy; and if it is very large, so cut the two lips of the wound, and heal it from what causes it.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if you go against the wind or in another direction, and you hurry and use the place of vitriolic broith, and let it rest there II or III days as long as the wound is rotten, and return to the pot what was delayed with the wind.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Consider the forms of intruding tools, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb"; and they are also like the needles used to pierce sorcerers, and they are of copper citron, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color, and they are more proven by black lead to surround fistula pustules; and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of scabs are various in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if a scab has two cores of three types, and if a scab has three cores and is also of three types; and if a scab has two cores, and only one core scabs, and are also of three types; and all these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The blades of these are sharp, and some are so small that they only cut from one side, from which we scratch the skin in order to open veins or nerves; and those that are intermediate are re-used many times, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you see here; and we only use one on the flesh, like legs, arms, breasts, armpits, and other parts; and we never make another instrument smaller than this, resembling skin scrapers for fists, according to this shape, so that we scar with it:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it not at all in the place that he is healthy to join the veins, and arteries; and put not at all according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	No time should the breasts of some men be inflated when they begin to corrumpt, as if they were the breasts of a woman; and they should not remain ugly and swollen, and who should cure them, unless it is according to this great form from this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then skin the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with fire, then join the two lips of the wound together by stitching, and cure it until it is well; and if it does not heal, or the incision has not been made completely, so that the patient cannot rest, or for the bloodletting, then you should fill the wound with moistened cotton in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it has drained the residue and the fat, then cure it until it is well.
des apostemes des asselles	of the heels
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The hoofs that come from the heels are treated like hard scrofulas or if it has ridges, and if there is one that contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are emptied, then employ the wound with wet cotton, and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment before it is well:
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if the wound gets bowels, then apply fire cautery as we have said before:
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the flesh above it is tight, then many abscesses are created, all of which go to the escaped vein and abscess; and if you know when it's for the artery, then the abscess will be long and complete; and when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel extraction; and when it's for the vein, then consider moving away from appearances; and this is madness to cover up this abscess, and most surely when it tightens the joints and angles and other places, and it is very great.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the artery is cut and the flesh above it tightens, then many abscesses form, all of which go to the escaped vein; if you know that it's for the artery, then the abscess will be long and complete; when you feel it with your fingers, if you feel extraction; when it's for the vein, consider moving away from appearances; this is madness to cover up the abscess, and most surely when it tightens the joints and angles and other places; and it is very great.
des apostemes des ners	the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when they come from the artery and from the vein, they come to the nerves, and similar things, when they are torn or by too much work.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and arms and in all of them or where there are joints, and these are bitter abscesses, and their color seems like the color of the flesh, and they are in many dispositions without pain; and when it is held together, if one feels pain, and it is not perfectly hard all over, but mutates well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor does it cover or cover, and that which is at the head or at the forehead, makes the skin to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, if it has a fingerhold, and he copes it at the root; and if it is large, if it hangs on the nail, and then scorches it, and then the bone, and assembles the wound with the stitch, and takes care of it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of the large belly hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There was once in the belly and nowhere else a thing like a fungus, and it is called a "fungus" because of its appearance; it is a subtle root, and a big one; and I saw one man who had two such bellies that they looked like fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and they were rotten, and ran together with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I took them and found that the one weighed XVIII ounces, and the other VI Z., and the head incisions were so that if you look at them, the patient is moist, and the color of the ear is white and moist and has a subtle root; If you chop it with a large knife, then hold the fire cauterization in front of you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelu, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pois bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess infected, and I will come to the cure of the ulcer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the bad blood
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the bad blood appears as an abscess or wound from a stab or cut, and it is on the abdomen and there are some boils, just as in other wounds, or from the blood flowing from a vein or artery according to what is before, or from wind; and if it is from the stab of the sword and from the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the issue of the intestine, then it is more various, and when it is pressed on both sides so that it moves and then returns, and by chance if it is tight, and it enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	Et s'il est à cause d'humidité, c'est une chose légère, et il est bon de le presser bien fort entre ta main, ne le contraignant point; et s'il est à cause de sang, si est-il par ces signes l'apothème gros et dur, et est-il enfoncé selon une quantité; et s'il est à cause d'un vent, si est-il soufrant au tochtier, et l'ouvrage si est que tu regardes que son apparence est pour le sang de l'artère, ou de la veine, ou du vent.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and it is good to press it hard between your hand, not restraining it; and if it is due to blood, let it be by these signs the apotheme large and hard, and let it be driven according to a quantity; and if it is due to wind, let it be sultry at the chest, and the work let it be that you see that its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or of the wind.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you before, or chapitre of the apothèmes, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, it is necessary that you command the patient to dye his hair, and let it hang down straight, then sign all around the bowel; then order him to pull gently between your hands, then go around the place where you have signed it with all your sputum, then extend half of the appendix above all the large hook; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a firm silk rope, and let the patient lie down; then perform half of the appendix hanging on the thread, and put your index finger there, and feel the intestine; if you find it attached to the thread, let it go, and push the intestine towards the back of the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, take hold of the hook, and cut away the surplus; and if the artery opposes or makes a vein, go with a loud noise, then return to your work and take II needles, and put II thread through them, and tie the needles around what you have made a hole in; then strain the appendix in IIII places above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place hang until it rot and putrefies, and cut it off when it is thin and putrid, then cure what needs to be cured, and cut the appendix as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place where it needs to be cured, and solder the place.
dou chancre	dou chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Now we have spoken in the division of the appearances of scrofula, and how it must work by medicine, and how one should avoid the cure with iron; and we say that scrofula begins in the breast, and great caution is needed in its treatment, and the old man said: When there is scrofula in the place where it should be cut off like scrofula in the breast, and in the loins, and in similar places, then it must all be cut off when it is in an advanced state; and when it is great and old, so that you cannot approach it, for I have never found one who was cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the overtaking, when it is in a place where it can be overtaken, as we have said, is that you never purge the disease of black colic; then make it better if it has become manifestly full, then afire the disease well in a good place for making the overtaking; then pour your oncides or scrofula, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run completely, and press the place with your hand or with anything, and if the escaping of the blood makes the incision of the artery or vein contrary to cauterizing, then cauterize until the blood is dried up; then treat it with other treatments until it is cured.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	from dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	be cut from two parts. At the point, and nevertheless it should not be so deep that it can come into contact with the intestine when you insert it, and cannot be wounded; then observe that the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: it is necessary that you make a cut on the right side of the boude III; and if it is caused by the liver, then make the cut on the left side of the boude III; and if it is caused by bile, then make the cut on the right side, and let the patient lie on his back on the cut surface, so that the superfluity does not run into the weak body; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and hold your hand over all the spatumile as you would do when scraping off something from a quantity of one finger or more by wrapping it around; then pierce the spatumile until the liquid comes out at the top, and then pour it out, and take this instrument in which is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is shaped like a silver hook, and is made of lightweight bronze or copper, and has one small hole in the middle; and on one side there are three holes, and on the other side two holes, and on the other side one hole; and the head is cut off like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the scribes cut the feathers into:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top is the tool, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it should be applied now to the instrument; empty half or a third, because if you empty more than it is appropriate at that time, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will face death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick and his pulse mean, then hold the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the cure that blocks the hole that is on the medicine, of which I have spoken, so you pierce in this way; then restart the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering, and hold back from doing this as long as he does not delay but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the disease, and you leave it with much water, so that the cure of the grave or sand is hot, and through much sweat or bath and in the sun, and darkens from drinking; and the cure of drying medicines until he is well, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	the stopping of the flow of urine
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born with a small foreskin, or if it has one, it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it comes to pass that he does not pierce the most delicate skin of all with this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put on the loose foreskin of leather, and bind it up so that it remains there for three or four days, and when he begins to urinate, if the foreskin is closed, let it urinate, and then remove it; and perhaps it will not be noticed, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the foreskin closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the wound is open and pus has accumulated, if there is a hole, as we have said, if it widens.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the perforation in its proper place are scarred, for no one is born with a perforation at the base of the penis, because it cannot urinate until it rises up towards the testicles; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come out as far as the scrotum, and this is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of treatment is such that the patient lies down on his back, so that the head of the penis and the scrotum are raised up like a bird's breast; so that the perforation comes out in the middle, as it should; and be careful not to cause pain from the sanction [penis] which often happens, and if it does happen, stop the bleeding from that which stops the sanction, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 종종 사타구니에 발진이 생기는데, 그 모양이 추하고, 나쁜 것과 좋은 것이 있습니다. 따라서 당신은 아홉 번 미세한 바늘로 찔러서, 코르크 마개처럼 눌러서 모든 것을 꺼내오고, 그 다음에는 면봉에 물을 적셔 이집트식 기름으로 바른 다음, 디펜딘을 발라 건강해질 때까지 관리하십시오.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	If the blisters are malignant, of a purple color and smelly, then you must apply fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have chopped it off, and some of the blisters are inside the penis and some outside, then you must first remove the ones that are inside; and when they have healed, remove the ones that are outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you have healed them all together, if the head of the penis is not completely healed and it doesn't look good, and there is blackness and corruption in its tip and testicles; then you must cut off everything that is black and corrupted, then apply honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and dates, and heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	Et if the pain comes, then administer the cautery according to these two dispositions together: that is to say, at the beginning of the pain and corruption; and if the foreskin of the penis is corrupted and retracted, so you should boil or heat a twig of pliers, and urinate on the patient; and when the hair is peeled off from the head of the penis which has not yet been circumcised, or which has been injured by a sore or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with a scalpel until the ligaments are separated and the foreskin is freed from all sides; and if this is a difficult thing to say, then scrape it with a scraper at the base of the penis and the skin; then separate them well, and put a thin linen cloth soaked in cold water on top, so that it does not peel off again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	is not a continuous wound like other wounds; however, when we perform this operation on our own children, it is necessary to do it with care and skill so that it is done well and lightly for the benefit of salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not mention circumcision for their children, because they did not use it in their law, and we have only this one acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the most master and wise men who perform circumcision around the genitals, and with great strength and all newness; so it is done because there are two folds, and perhaps if one cuts over the other, it will be torn.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it is covered again, and the pain is doubled, and the washing that comes from the genitals is not assured at the tip of the member; and the washing of the fingernails sometimes escapes the nail, and destroys the work, and often happens that there is no need for washing, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	I have found the goodness of the experiment in the mondification which is made at such force on all the thread, for the forces cut just as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you squeeze your hand, if you cut it equally all around; but the thread should be well stretched around the leather; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything to tie the thread too tightly around the verge, and then let it rest in all directions that you can; then let it lie between your hands completely straight, and repunt the forces between your hands or your fingers so that the child does not see them, nor any of the tools; then blow on it or kiss it, and turn it up as high as possible so that the head of the verge is in place; then clean it well of the dirt that has accumulated, then tie the thread double, then lie it down I thread to the other II threads; and let it hold for II days by the second thread at the knuckle and the little finger, and rub it gently with a cloth greased with a good amount of dried rosewater, confit with oil of roses and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with another medicine until he is well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the shoulders is like this: the two shoulder blades should be soft and flexible, and the shoulders themselves should be long and even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The mistake in the purification is when the curse flows out of the incision; so it is necessary that you spread it with your finger, so that the edge forms an abscess; and make it even, and if you cannot hold it with your hand, grasp it between pincers, and then apply it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it passes three days and that which is at the tip of the penis is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess has healed, and scabs it lightly; if you can move it easily, and keep it away from the part of the penis, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat with powder the place that is swollen and sore, which we have spoken of in the treatment of powders, and if the poultice is applied too thickly, and it goes up, it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, as long as it is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retaining of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retaining of urine is caused by a stone in the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or colic, or similar things that we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not pass, and you see that it is retained because of a stone at the base of the spine or the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be laid on his back; and let him place the tip on his back, and extend his abdomen from above his back, and restrain the patient so that he remains in this position as long as he can; and then force the neck of the bladder toward the extraction of the stone from above, so that the urine passes; and if it does not pass, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should use an instrument called a "syringe", which is shaped like this: and let it be made of fine silver, as light as the feathers of a swallow; and let the tube be about a palm long and half as wide, and let it be fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the way of issuing the urine is that you take I double thread, and bind at the head I piece of wool or cotton, and bottle the head with thread inside the syringe; and wrap the surplus of the wool and the bottle up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and auburn of egg, and make sit the patient on a seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with wet oil and olive oil and spring water; then put lightly the syringe in the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the bouge; then bottle the syringe before jusc' to the bladder, and let the patient come jusc' to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order but that which you lead or she went is twisted; then the thread is all bound and bound, and the urine follows the wool, then it is taken away, and the urine runs; and recommence the syringe as long as the bladder is empty and the patient is comforted.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When the blisters or the sore comes in the bladder, or it is assembled, and you see to distill water and medicine, if done to all the instrument which is called "clepsydra", and it is the form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it is III holes: II from one part, and I from the other, as you see; and let the medicine-head through which the medicine drips be such that it well stops the stream without addition, if one may draw the moisture, and pour when necessary; and when you see to move your medicines in the bladder, put the head of the syringe in the moisture, and pour while stirring what is inside; if you pour the moisture into the head, and then rebounce the head with force, so it will enter the moisture and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which one catheterizes the bladder: that is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or brass, and this is the shoulder-blade higher up; and desos in the heart or the ligaments; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture that you saw to clean out the bladder, then tie between the two breasts formed of good double thread, and heat I piece of moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the cleaned bladder into the staff, and strain your hand on the bladder all the moisture coming up, so that the patient feels that the moisture has come to the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make it a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then bottle a strong thread in these holes, then put the circle together as you would a patch, and put what you see of oil and moisture and water inside, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes out to the bladder.
de la piere	of stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the types of stone and their extraction in general; I said before that there is a difference between stones that come out whole and those that are broken into pieces; and about the size of stones, and about the bladder and penis; and now I will say it clearly and concisely.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is stuck in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and it is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder into subtlety; and I open it, and massage the patient's penis, and rub it many times, and then smoothen it out; and its roots fall away; and the recovery is lighter for children up to four years old, and there is much grief in older people, and between middle age and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with enema, in order to remove all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it does not happen often that he wants to cut into stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs and move them up to dislocate, so that the stone falls completely into the bladder, and does not remain in one place; then make him sit with his hands between his knees, and his legs dislocated, so that the bladder is all turned downward; then feel for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in space, hurry to cut it on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If it does not fall when you touch it all over, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is old and complete, or cut your finger, if the patient is young and incomplete; and press it into its base, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your thumb, press it against the neck of the bladder; then press upwards with your thumb, and cut at the place where you feel it.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder to his hand, and he commands that he extends to his right hand the testicles up, and on his left hand he rubs the skin that is dislocated behind the testicles in the part where one makes the waist; then he pours the sputum out, so that this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And open between what is between the testicles and the fundament, not in the middle but on the edge of the left side; and let it be right on the stone, and your two be close to the fundament, and let the cut be through the navel so that it is wide at the bottom, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps press it so that the one which is between the fundament, comes out without work; and know that there is a part of stone or angles, and edges: let it be like a piece of metal, and round, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A cell where there are angles and corners, make the hole bigger; and if it does not come out, then you pull it with pliers that are like a file at the top, so that it does not escape; or you pour out the fine oil on the head; and if you cannot catch it in this way, then it is a little broken, and if it is peeled off, then you put vitriol on it; and if there is more than one stone, then first pull out the biggest one at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then forge it hard, and the smaller ones after, if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very big, then it is necessary to make a bigger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out by itself because the limb cannot close; but you must keep trying to pull it out, or to cut it into pieces with pliers, until you have finished; and when you have finished your work, then apply hot balm and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and put a wet cloth covered in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then cut off the patient's hair from his neck, and do not untie the bandage until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, so that it rises well in its place of oil and water, then cure with the ointment of garlic and the ointment of basil until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come to the wound and corrode, and congealed blood in the bladder, and is held back by urine, which comes out in a certain way that does not jump with the urine: then you must put a plug in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and clean it; and raise the wound with water and mint and tar, and help it in all ways that you can until it is healthy; and it is good that you tie its two legs, and put the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it lies in the bladder, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; then heal it with this treatment that I have just described, and cut it many times, so that you excuse the cutting because of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proved this myself.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	I will forge it according to this form, and be three-angled, riveted with an iron nail:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and smooth the edge of the iron nail, so that it cannot move back into the stone; then tap the nail lightly into the edge of the stone, so that it does not come out again; and turn the nail to your hand little by little, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then soon after the urine will flow, and then press your hand on what is held back in the stone, which is in the iron.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken and jumps with urine and the patient gets well; and if you cannot do this for any reason that hurts it, then I will file the stone and another above it, and then pull out the iron between the two threads, and extract it strongly, and release one of the threads, and cleanse the frozen blood in the wound; and heal it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	May it happen that a stone is passed away in women, and if it has not happened at any time, this is a painful cure, and is protected by three things: one is that per adventure the woman is a virgin; and the second is that we cannot find a woman who knows well to dislodge herself from the mirages, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that if per adventure we cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more perfectly formed than that of the man, so that it is necessary to make a more profound incision, and there is great fear. And if it is necessary to go to another, then you should seek a midwife who knows well, and at few, and if you do not find her, do not look for her any further; I know a woman who knows part of the art, and order her to do that which you command in the inquiry of the stone; and see very well whether she is a virgin: then it is necessary for her to put her right hand or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then she obliges her by oath to put her right hand on the fundament and wants and presses her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she pees, then it is necessary that she move from the bladder's entrance to the anus little by little until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cover on the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle where the muscle is attached, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move your two legs above the stone or below it, and cut at the first small; then blow on the wound, if you feel the stone very much in the wound as long as the stone can come out further, and know that there are many ways of stones: this is to say, small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the signs, then know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	If it doesn't go away, put the vitriolic broie on it and hold it for an hour until the sore is made worse; then return to your work, as long as the stone is gone, and have the tools that I told you about in extracting the stone from men to help you with your work; and if it doesn't go away, and it's the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the place and drain the blood and urine, and don't repeat this, and leave the stone behind, and don't extract it, lest the patient die; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire is gone from the wound, and the flesh begins to close, if you return to your work, let the stone be far away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white soap that is found in the shell of the egg, which covers the testicles; and it is called "syfac," and there is none properly in the shell of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and this skin of the ball between the white soap is what we have said; and such a thing does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia is so feeble that it comes to the testicles, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And it does not come from impact on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: or it is color that declines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and such things happen more often; and these are the signs of this gathering, for if it is white soap as we have said, then the spermatic cord is stiff, a long figure like an egg, and does not close the testicles because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the proper towel, if the abscesses have pus with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white fluid, then he feels bad. So when you want to know the color of the moisture, try all the inside quarter, because its form is in front.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the inside, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with fire, if it is necessary that the patient be healed according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and covers himself with sheets; then sits on his left side, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extends the rod to one of the two ribs from between the testicles; then take the lead spittle, and cut the skin of the testicles among them until you come to the long finger, and let it fall naturally; and be your cut all straight in cutting the skin of the testicles jusc'a white fluid, and the scalpel gently according to the power; then pierce the white fluid plain with water at a large opening, and drain out all the water, and then put your fingers, and raise the white fluid upstream; and do not touch the testicles, but only the white fluid; cut it in pieces separately the cost of him subtlety, that if you do not cut it well, the water will return; and if the egg had jumped to your work, if you take it back to its place when you have completed the work of the white fluid; then join the two testicles with a stitch, then cure it as you would other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of corruption of blood; then take the egg and extract it, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then take the other part as you did with the first one evenly, then rinse the blood, and put into the wound another wet one in oil rosin; and put away another wet one in wine and oil, and put on the two eggs, and put double sheets over them, and tie it up all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	And take two sheets, and fill them with cotton wool according to this form and are assembled by sewing in the throat of the shirt, and one of the shoulders preys on the foundation up to the back, and the other to the part of the shoulder; and the other two chiefs on the two arms, and is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the shirt; and no time is medicated this ramice of cautery in the place of a iron bar, and it is that you preys the cautery cuttle-skin, and take the skin of the eggs, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the egg is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white syfac, and burn it with the small cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And rub the wound in all ways that you can, as long as you clean it all out; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and keep your mind clear from bloodletting, and more cautious than the incision of an abscess; and if anything makes you opposite, or an abscess or a bloodletting or another thing, then cure what makes you opposite, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid and will not wait for this treatment because of its horror, then make a perforation as I said before, and it is that when you are sure with the signs that we have said that the water is there, then put the patient on one side up; because pierce the abscess in the part of the bone to all the large skull, and place the perforation long of the neck; and make the hole wide so that all the water runs out; then put cotton on the spot, and tie it, and leave it to run the remaining water, then cure it as long as the wound heals; and if the white cloth does not let the water come out into the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument that collects the water from the drops, so that the shape is as I have said before; and open the wound slightly, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after VI months or more, and when it is gathered as before, and so the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I understand that in this part of the text there are many interpretations, so it seems better to leave it; and I will tell you about the technique and the appearances of the testicles.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I therefore say that many abscesses come from the scrotum, and most often from the testicles; and this is usually the case.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to be understood: either by the excessive acidity and ague that spreads to the scrotum or by percussion; and the color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the skin; it does not cause pain and is painful; and sometimes there is a dark-colored, painful, piercing abscess, and never comes from an artery, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, if you warm the area with hot water, when you press it with your hand; and it is better that you do not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux, et puet on bien faire la taille sur ceste semblance, et sur les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fuer du blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocation of the shoulder is caused by moisture causing it to move out of its normal position, which results in malpositioning of the limb and severe pain and injury for the patient. To treat this, you should first reset the dislocated head of the shoulder, then carefully move it back into place while avoiding any sudden or abrupt movements. If the dislocation has caused damage to the surrounding tissues, you should gently stretch and massage these areas to release any tension and promote healing.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the dislocation has caused damage to the surrounding tissues, you should gently stretch and massage these areas to release any tension and promote healing. Additionally, if the dislocated shoulder is located behind the affected area, it is important to carefully cope and extract it as we have outlined previously.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your wounds are healed, if you employ wool dampened with oil and wine, then the surgeon should apply other remedies until they are well.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is one aposteme wrapped in a wrapping resembling an inchworm, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans much when he goes; and the surgeon of this disease should be so fearsome as this before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the old one did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you sit the patient on an easel, and then pour the softener of the testicles down his throat at both sides, to all the vessels which are near the penis, and wet them with the master, and spread them out flat; then cut with a sharp scythe across the vessels, as far as they are uncovered, and then peel off each part, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in temples; then he sticks an awl or there is a double thread, and ties it to the first place where the vein has come, and ties it quickly to the other head; then he draws them up straight, according to the length of the body, and removes the dampness that is corrupted; then cure the wound as you do with others, so that no vessel squirts out because of the incision of the vessels, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	about the surgery of the sick
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Regarding the surgery of the sick, if it is due to sectioning, or extension on the belly in the part of the angles, so that the intestines descend from this section on one of the loins; and this section is either from the syphi-cut, or from the extension of it, and these two ways come about from causes: from impact, or jump, or braying, or lifting a heavy burden, and by similar things; and the signs when it is an extension of the syphic cut, are that it comes little by little, for a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are even until near the end, so that the syphic [cut] hastens the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the syphic [cut], that it brings about sudden pain, and the abscesses are different in appearance, and it appears on the skin near by, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body away from the syphic [cut].
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the girdle with the intestine, and is held in, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	For in these cures of iron for fear, so that it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these cures of iron for fear, so that it must be avoided. And the manner of the opening so that you command the patient that he keeps the intestine to his hand inside the wound, if he can pull it out; then is soft on his neck between your hands, and remove the scales; then put the cure above, and scrape all the skin of the scalps long; then pour in the water of the size uncinate according to what you need to open the wound, and is so that the water comes out; then cut off the hair that is under the skin, as much as the white skin is hard uncovered from all sides; then pour your index on the side that follows the scalp, on the side that is between the white skin that is covered from the skin of the head, and between the second skin, and away from behind the head, and between the second skin; and then move it with your hand towards the cure of the scalps, and hold the hair to your left hand, and cut off the hair to all the skin; and command the minister that he extends the hair above, and take what is behind the ligature; and look at your two hands if there is any white skin wrapped or hard, and if you do not find anything, pour water on the belly; then take a needle that has X thread made of II threads, and pour it into the back part of the skin, which is after the scalp; then tie the thread, which we have said is uncovered from the skin of the scalps, with a strong knot of II parts; then wrap the hair threads, and tie them together in II parts, so that no threads that feed them can enter, that an abscess does not come; and put above this II knots according to the first long knot of II threads of that one, and after these two knots leave a piece of skin that is covered from the scalp which is desoz; then after everything else according to the roundness that the euf carries; then wrap in the part that is covered from the skin of the scalps, until it is tight, and bowe it, as we have said before; then pour wet wool in oil, and put it on the wound, and i put the knot that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white wine that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it bleeds itself; and if it delays in the bleeding, let it be heated by warm water, and put on what we have said, as long as it bleeds; then cure the wound with another cure until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernial hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old man said that it is made as the ramie which is joined together, in such a way that you tie the thrones, after cutting them lightly on the back of the leg; then chop off, and cure the abscess of him who suffers, as long as the thrones bleed; and treat it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No times comes the rupture in the veins, if as we have said, and open their ways; and let not any of the bowels come out by the cohitions, and if they do, it is little, and repair all hours; and yet, if he stays too long on this point, so believes the wound or syphac, until the bowels come out; and what happens because of the extension of the syphac which is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then it is softened and inflates their ways and open; and the cure is by cautery, as we have before said; and is never cured with iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then take the place of the rupture, enlarged according to the quantity of three times; and then remove the syphac which is out of the skin that follows, then take the thread and lay it on the place apparent of the syphac; and press it perfectly from the belly, then cut the two ways apparent of the syphac on his head of the thread, and cut one and the other; then remove the head of the thread, and do not cover the syphac or extend the wool nor any other thing, if as I have told you in the cure of the ramose bowels; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the hairs, if it is hot and heals the wound, as long as it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The remedy is constant, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is moist in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the leather of the shoes becomes soft in certain men, because the hairs that are inside them are softened, and it is necessary to see; and it is necessary, when you are healing it, to make a incision on his back, and take off the leather that is softened on the natural leather; then join the two lips to one seam, and cover it up, cutting off the excess of the leather that was softened in III seams or IV firmly; then cut between the seams, and heal it as you would other wounds, until it is healthy, and take off the thread.
dou chastrement	doulx chaste
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For I know that chastisement is the use of a rod in our law, and because of this I would not like to speak about it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the horse should answer when asked and be cured in horse language; and the other, because we have often needed to chastise certain animals for our aid, such as rams and sheep and hares and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attracting or by splitting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that in which we do it by attraction, let us sit the animal in warm water until its testicles are softened and relaxed; then grab them with your hand, until they are set back and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the chastisement of size: it is necessary that you take the animal, and press the scrotum to your left hand, then tie the suspension, and draw up each testicle as far as you can; and leave no pimple of the skin and subtle essence which is on the scrotum; and this way of chastisement is milder than that which is done by attraction, because with attraction there may be some remains of the testicles, so that the animal desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	is according to two ways like men: one is that between the two crotches open as much as the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in wetting there is urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another way is in women, and has on the pubis as much as a penis and two crotches.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of man and woman is that you copule the crotches together, and cure them as other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps out of the skin of the crotch, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tetanus
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	is a wriggling worm on the natural part, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it as much like a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is fitting that you have the surfeits of the tingling in your hand or the onces, and make it light; and do not go too much into detail, lest there come blood flow, then cure with other remedies until he is well; and to another cart that comes out at the mouth of the mare, and use it, and perhaps jump outside, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called him the old "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary that you cope with it, as we have said in the chapter on tingling, and cure her until she is well.
de erratique	of the errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratique if it is that the nature of the woman is not yet perceptible, or the perforation is small; and is natured by birth, or happens through disease that has come about; or is by a cart being driven, or by subtle poison or spice, and is made perfect in the mare, or in the coast, or the dung, or whatever it is; and they do not conceive, and the childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the regard of the ball.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the back is bent forward, it is close to appearing, whether to the left or to the right.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is soft and subtle, and it is close to the sides, if you hurry, and then turn over: put your two fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then make the two sides form, as long as the subtle fluid is running, and the stoop is gone; then take wool, and moil it in oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman lie on her back every day, so that he cannot hold it together.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the subtle stuff is hard and thick, you must take a loofah-like thing that looks like a leaf of sage.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stoop is from a horse, if you suspend it by the neck and cover it; and bring medicines that stop the blood, as in the case of a dragon's wound, incense, all mixed together with ash; then bring a long cane so that the wound cannot heal; and let him be treated thus for a long time, and bring him linseed oil; then he is cured of other diseases until he is well.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the wound comes the poultice, if it is done according to this method, then there are no abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For with the wound that is chapped, one must not touch fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	are openings of veins whose cure without a surgeon's assistance, and when the hemorrhoids are old they become thorny; and we have said in the division the appearances of wounds, and signs, and I will say here those who receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the thistle, when they are completely formed in the wound, and do not hurt unless one touches them, then it is cured by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the wound, can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore you should put the woman in a cold house, then tie her with thorns, and dip it in its roots, then sprinkle on medicines that restrain blood, as well as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour her hair onto the wall for an hour, then set it in cold water; and if the pain comes back, put it in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranates and gall and similar things, and then take wheat flour, and confound it with honey and easily, and make a poultice with it and put it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if it doesn't, if you make a poultice at the back and massage with oil, then take another one, and the juice of plantain or of hawthorn with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, apply the poultice for as long as it remains healthy; and that which is called 'balath' is red and resembles a sharp chief, so you cover it as I have said above; and then cure it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the breast
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	come about in the breast: as cancer and painful abscess, and herpes, and festering sores, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the chapter.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I die in this tract the chaut which comes to the navel, who is not an aposteme but a bowstring; and if you know how the iron works, look at how the apostemes are sharp when they begin to come out, and full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it, but let me die as long as the pain is relieved; and then place the sick person on II small chairs where he leans his legs, and put his feet together, and tie them well with a good knot; and then take the breath towards the right side of the navel, and introduce the instrument with which we work the mouth of the navel, from which comes the form afterwards; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you stick the pointed end first to determine the depth of the navel, so that what enters into the instrument does not come in more deeply than it should, and does not hurt the sick person; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the navel with cloth, so that the instrument does not hurt it; and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top, and dip it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess is opened and one puts the hand to the meat softly, if it is necessary that you cover the head with a woolen cloth; and when the bowels are empty, if it is necessary that you put moist tents in the wound with oil of roses or with dry green oil; then place the tent firmly on the wound at the base of the bone, and on the other side of the bone put dry moist tents with cooked raspberries or with carrots and long herbs; then continue to dress after two days of healing until he is healthy; and do not raise the bandage or the wound by means of a hot poultice of water and honey, and then only of water or cooked roots of lisp and aristeology. Then renew the dressing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is covered with skin, then you must beware of cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The art of childbirth: She should know the natural figure of childbirth, and the signs that tell when a woman is rushing down there, and desires to smell the air: then the baby rushes out with a rush; then you will know that these childrens are according to the natural figure, and the issue comes from her head, and the second one with him; and when you see these signs, then you should lightly press her belly, so that the baby comes quickly; for when it goes up on her head, then the second one is with him, and the married man is washed away by his excesses with good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes not once upon its feet, but comes upon its chest or shoulder, and its hands, or sometimes upon its belly, or sometimes upon its neck, and turns upside down by accident; so it is a matter of childbirth that she be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and delusion, and I will show you all the figures how to help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If a man falls upon his head by natural cause, and the woman gives birth with great pain, and the virtue of him is weak, so that if it were put on a seat, or the women hold it; and raise its essence of oil or fenugreek cooked, and then pour the ball between his two little spatumiles whose form here is.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If a second cut is made, and the nail is removed until the moisture is gone; and if the baby does not come out, then it is necessary to massage the woman with fenugreek oil mixed with sesame oil; then let her lie and strain for an hour: now the baby will come.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands go out again, then you should repeat this lightly; and if they cannot enter, then set the woman on a chair, and have her lie down with her feet up; then take the chair off the ground, and tie her so that she does not stand up; and if the hands cannot enter, and the baby is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that has been placed here before, and pull out the child, and do it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of a child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes down on its feet, so it must be raised up again; and then turn it from side to side little by little until it is even; and then hold it with your hand little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Until he jumps up to his knees, if he is instructed to squeeze and make him shake with fear; if he jumps, may God help you!
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump as we have said, if it turns little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he becomes light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	For then he becomes light. And if it does not come as we have said, if you take muscillaige of water, and oil of Sisamente, and gum melted, and grind all in a mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and away this glue, then let her sit in a water bed until she is soaked; then let her sit down, then make her shake and squeeze her mouth and nose, and lightly squeeze her belly, because the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's birth between the thighs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the baby is born in this way, if it is placed on its back and then lifted by the hands; and then being hung over the bed, and lying down on the bed; and then it lifts its legs little by little, and then its navel hangs down; and then it moves its legs little by little, and then moves its navel upwards, and then it puts its legs; and thus the baby is born. And order the woman to lie down until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the child who comes out with a wide hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, let the woman get up and go; if she cannot go, let her lie down on the bed, and stretch out her legs in turn; then I will mention the massage that I have described; and if she does not give birth, let her sit down on a chair, and try to bring back the hand; and bring the child according to its natural shape, and make it stretch, and order her to lie down until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on his neck, and had spread his hands, and his face turned toward his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I think that the bailif should grip his hand, then little by little, and lightly; and when it is even, if he sets it on the muscled part of her back and oil as we have said, then he orders her to move little by little; and when you have done this, let her sit on a chair, and he orders her to lean; and she shakes.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this manner for all the second part, if he puts his hand on his thumb until the moisture is gone; and if he ties himself down on his face and neck, so that he does not get caught, and the child dies; then put the child inside, as long as you have put him in the right way, and order the woman to lean back slightly: and then do it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Saches that twins are sometimes born, and never more than three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, and it does not happen often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an unusual thing, and they do not live long, unless one is born alone; but if they are multiplied together, and brought forth by the doctor who is skilled in this matter, he is bound by the bid of the king; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are born with a twitch, as we have said before, and the doctor is skilled in this matter, and does it quickly and lightly; and he should do so as well as possible for their salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	No child is ever formed with more than one or two or three or four or five or six or seven, or more than fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise king, and he knows how to do it well, because sometimes strange things happen; so do as you think best.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of a dead child or her womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to work by hand; if it is necessary that you know whether the woman is of sound health, and she has no accident or fear of death; if it is necessary that the woman be tied down on her back and her legs raised; and the minister drips oil on both sides where she is tied up so that she can be treated for the falling out of the child; then rub her mouth with moist oils made from althaea and fenugrec and linseed seed, then dip the doctor's hands in these oils and these muscaraigns; then pour them into the woman lightly, then wants to put him down or she pours the oil on his head where she pours the oil on his hair, then puts it on his head lightly, then wants to put the oil or pinch it and press it against her sides, and the falling out is at her feet, if he pinches it or pinches it and presses it against her cost, and the falling out is at her feet, let him dip the oil in his hand, and put the cup between his two hands on his left side, and pour the oil lightly with his right hand, and dip the oil in any of the places I have mentioned, as long as he comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the oil:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then take another piece of twine, where you need it to be equal; and then make them equal by moving one side and the other, so that they come out, and let the teeth of the twines hold them in place, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if one part stops, so oil some of its two strings and squeeze it in that part, and pull the other part; and if none of it stops, so put this twine or higher up, and do this as much as it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by the contraction, so you must wrap it in a cloth until it is all out; then tie it at the joint of the sole or the ankle, and likewise for the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's loins are large and he is stricken in the birth, or if there is a sharp point assembled, then it is fitting that you press the thorny spittle between your two hands, and shape the point and draw out the sharp; or you put it into the instrument which is called 'almidach', of which the form comes with the instruments or chaplet which follows this one; and so likewise do I make the child's loins naturally large; and then pull the bones with pliers, and if the loins leap, they are drawn out with force, so that they are split, until the moisture which is in the birth runs out; and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces by the edge of your hand; and if it swells in the belly or breaks the ribs, then it is fitting that you pierce it as long as the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is stuck on its feet, then the mild pulling, and the direction is towards the mouth of the mare.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is stuck in the abdomen or chest, then cover that with a cloth wrapped around your hand; and cut open the abdomen or chest as much as the moisture allows; and if another member is dislocated and stuck, then stretch out your hand around the mare's mouth, and pull firmly; then either oncino or two incisions, and pull harder; and if the mare's mouth is tightened by an abscess that has just come, then it must not be worked, but moist and greasy things should be applied; and apply poultices, and cut into water-softening and moisturizing agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is stuck on its ribs, and you can make them even, then apply what we said about the live child; and if one cannot do that, then cut it into pieces, and leave nothing of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done so, bring the patient who has had this accident in an aphis that comes in the mare; and if the wound comes from the sun, let it be put in water, and bring other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose child had been killed; then she was advised by one doctor, and another refused to help her.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the aphis swelled up, and began to rot.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it; I thought for a long time, but could not stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of great power, and in three days an bone came out; and after some more days another one came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, because there were no bones in her belly.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to bandage the wound and hold the bones in place as long as the woman was still in shock; and she waited a long time before coming back to her senses, and there was just a little blood there; and I didn't remember this paste until recently, when a master came across an unusual thing, that he knew how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the spouse to their bed
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here follows the form of pressing, so that we pull back the muscles and ligaments; and at II turns, we put II bones in II places.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the horns should be thinner than the restrictor and made of ebony or boxwood; and its mouth should be large enough to accommodate a palm and a half, and each of the two limbs should have an adjustment of this same material, which should be closed at one end and at the other, a palm's length or a little more; and these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the spouse to open when the horns turn.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, its appearance more subtle and lighter, is made from ebony or boxwood according to the shape of the pliers; and has II supports, as you see, a palm long and II wide; and when you open the jaw completely with all the instrument, if she sit on the bed with her feet hanging and her legs spread, then join together the II supports on the jaw and keep the head of the instrument between her knees; then open your hand on the whole instrument, as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you opened the mouth of the jaw, until the ball makes what she wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all fitted together, and has many shapes; and when you see it arranged, the faster it works, and the higher it reaches for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I do not despise the instrument which you have not provided, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is restrained at childbirth, it is necessary that you command the patient to hold her hair, and then make her sneeze with cautery, and hold your hands to her mouth and nose; and if she sneezes by herself, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If she does not sneeze by herself, I can do it, and make a hole or lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, as calamus, rue, anise, camomile, cassialine, and centum; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or poured in water over the fire; then place one rod or lid on the pot, and the other head in her mouth, and let her sneeze as the vapors come out of the woman's body; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you want to save the second hospital.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If she remains well after this cure, and is not feverish, order her to moisten her left hand in oil of thyme or in muscatel wine, and then let it fall into the nature, and will take the second one; and when she has found it, if she pinches it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the marring does not come out at the extraction; but she must move it a bit from side to side, and then pull it off; and thus it will come off.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the hole of the marring is tight stretched, we have spoken about the cure of sneezing and of fumigation with herbs; and if she has not everything that we have said, so keep you from foolishly stirring it up; but it is necessary that he who is at the hole of the marring, that you bind him to the woman's girdle, then the clisterize with oil of four-fold balm; if he will put it on and will set it free, and will go away; but nevertheless, when she puts it on so that a bad odor comes up to the stomach and to the head, and bleeds the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then there are smoke injections convenient for this: no one has tried the smoke of dandelion and dry figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument to be used is such that it can be smoked with herbs and the second ingredient, if this is so:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like a dog, and put the tip in the essence, and the shoulders wide on the fire; and let the smoke be on the coals, and the tar until it is spent, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but there is a subtle remedy for them: so it is necessary to instruct him that he pierce this foundation at his right hand, and does not pierce it with a sharp object, and bandage it so that it does not touch; then put another wet in wine and oil, and treat with ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, then put a plug in the hole and leave his hands free, and let him lie on his back when he goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no danger of sudden shock from a wound or an abscess; if the sudden shock must be covered: if it must be cured, as we have said, with a plug of mud.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	are the fistulas that come from the foundation are difficult, and grow more than those that come from the fundament of the members, or in the space between the II parts, if there is one or more; and when this nodation is old, if it opens, and again moistens with a white or subtle bow, and never these fistulas persisten; and are caused by what the sick person expels, or sometimes passes wind.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it pierces to the bladder and up to half the length of the penis; and it reaches up to the joint of the scrotum, and up to the tip of the cow's nose.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so recognize the fistula that goes to the base and not just; and it is that you stick your index or base, and stick a small gold or iron needle into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you stick a small string or hair of a horse in it as long as you feel the string or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, there will be no painful defecation or wind, as we have said: know that it doesn't pierce; but hasten to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula goes up to the bladder or up to the urinary conduit, if the urine jumps out, and can't be held back with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just at the joint of the hip, then let it be pushed up to its place. If there is no twisting and no inflammation around the joint, then it has already been pushed back into place, and there is no need for medicine or hasty feeling; and in these persistent pustules there is no cure except hard work, and the vain delusions of foolish men who get involved in them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	If it is not persistent and is not old, there is hope for health through iron, as I have experienced, and that is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he raises his legs up to his hips, and his hips are bent towards his stomach; then pour a measure of rain or wine if there is twisting, until you know where the piercing comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in his fundament, then you should insert your middle finger there; it will feel like the piercing has been pierced; and if you can feel between your finger and the syrph or the chalice, then you know that it is persistent; if not, work on it so that it can be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	On can dist this way that one can well make some well, but it happens little; and the help that one does, if one heats the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as is said before; and pours all hot into the fistula, until it comes out of the base; and makes this II times or III, so long as you know that these made char are burned, which seem like a feather of an owl; and then the cure of wet tenements covers, while those chars come out, and then the cure of wound puts on them, joining and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If so healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If not thus healed, it is not well; and if the tent is between, and does not pierce up to the bone which is at the base, and has between your two and the tent a thick cover of char or of medicine, and you see the fistula to this one who ensue the cover with care; then the cup of the beginning of the fistula, and pour on before the tent, and then the cautery after, until it comes up to the top of the tent; and will be delivered the tent, and will burn; then cure those made chars which seem like a feather of an owl, and there remains none.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun does not go out, and there is a space between you and the work, then fire cautery or medicinal acuteness.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For fire cautery brings together two things: namely, the burning of these joints, and the drying out of blood and the removal of moisture; then it cures the wet tent that is soaked or the dried up meat that is rotted in a hard joint, and the medicine is dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is reset, if it heals and does not return,
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the very foundation of it, and is distant from the body, then bottle it up or make a foundation for it, and dig this out.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	And if you feel the tent, and there are two threads or silk or joints, or it is ready to pierce, then there is only one way to stop it and that is to cauterize as we have said, or to chop it up to the very foundation, or to dig it out with a knife or other instrument; then put on a covering as we have said, and do not chop too much so that you cover the foundation which holds the joint in place, and bring forth the discharge by this voluntary way; then heal, as we have said, by applying medicine to the wound; by chance if it heals, or you remove the covering and clean out the infected part from the very foundation, or with a tent or other instrument; then cover up the rotten joint that is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and delay the fistula in the place from which the foundation has been removed: this is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times of fistulas according to this way: and it is when you put the tent in the fistula, and it is where it costs from the foundation delightful leather above, so it takes a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put I thread wrong in 2, and I bottle the tent all the way in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is piercing in the margin of the foundation inside, then remove the thread from that pierced, so you bottle your two at the foundation; and turn the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and pull them apart, and let them be I day or II; and do not restrain it again, as long as the thread covers those holes that are between two, and rub it; then cure the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you do pierce it in all ways that you can, let him not be too completely pierced.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not proper to do so for the bandage to fit perfectly, and then to heal, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spikelet that is made into a tube is such that it has one side sharp and piercing, and the other side smooth; and on the one hand it does not fit perfectly, and on the other hand it does not fit at all, for this reason it should not be bandaged perfectly, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Here is the translated text:
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you apply the stitch in this way: take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, and then bring the thread over and pierce the needle from the other side, and tie the two ends of the thread together around the needle, and make it large; and then pull out the thread, and do the same with all the others, and leave it to drain blood; then put on the base a wet drape coated with oil or wax, and place it on the base, and command the patient to rest; and then leave him until he has coughed up, and when he has, clean him of wound infection and other cures until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying out at the end of the intestine, and by necessity of nature, and when the illness is old and medicine is no longer effective.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you rub the scald on top of a spatula or your nail, which does not leave it moist; then treat it until it is hard as it should be; and if it cannot be hardened, start rubbing more vigorously than before, until it heals and is scorched; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	What rubs
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	It is a small spot that starts to itch in front of the neck, and it rubs perfectly; and there is no need for the trueve (a type of surgical blade), and one can feel it as if they were dead, and it comes all over the body, and more so on the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a strong vulture, and put that feather on the itch, until it turns red all around; then turn your hand over the entire feather as much as you can; and put it in place, and scorch the itch from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see that it is a dog of iron or of steel according to this shape, and is subtle and runs on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not cut it off, lest it be two-edged, and press it together; and if you see that the fire cautery is boiling, as it was before or with cautery paste of fire.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the bubble
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one should make a bubble of silver or of oak wood, or of melted iron or brass; and no one should use these instruments, little or great, according to those to whom they are sent.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These, therefore, that one brings as a remedy for children who are weak and suffering, these are small ones.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bubble is small and large above it, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say there is a rupture where the belly is tied, as you see, and the loins are pierced from within; and one of the sides has a hole, and in the other; and let the medicine be put into a bladder of wine or parchment, and pierce all around the small holes, and place between each hole I yard, then bottle into these holes a strong thread twisted in X or string inside; and assemble the belly as if it were a sheep; and when the medicine is within, if the instrument is before a strong thread, then it should be clotted; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and oint the head of the clister with oil or honey, or a similar thing, then bottle it lightly; then the minister takes it in both hands together until he is completely full, then removes the clister, and places the patient's legs against the wall, and lets the medicine come out as far as it can; and if he sleeps all night, so is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clisterize him with the disease of corruption of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then remind him until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or an abscess, then let the clister be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle clister on which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the cure of wounds; or we will tell you the cures of hands and medication, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and because of this.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by a fall of stone, and cutting with a sword or a dagger, or a lance or a staff or a spear, or similar objects; or that are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that strikes on the neck, or on the head, or the back, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the cure of each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds, for the reminder will come in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes about where the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a fall or from similar things, and the skin is torn everywhere, and the wound is large, and you doubt whether it is an abscess: if you do this quickly, save the patient's head in person if the wound comes from blood only out of the head, and let the patient eat no wine nor fatty meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	I say that if he cannot be saved, and his flesh is weakened, and he drinks no wine, nor eats fatty meat: and place on the wound, if it is hot, a warm compress made of cotton soaked in oil and applied gently, or with wine that has astringent properties; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh, and has not been moved by the wind, powder, which I will speak of a little later; and if he has moved it, place on some onions, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large as from a sword's blade and of appearance, the lips cannot be put together by tenderness, but are put together by縫ing, as I will say to the wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And if the wound is exposed to the bone, and it can hold only a little bit, then cover it; afterwards, cure the wound with medicine, and restore it with hard material instead of leather, and command the patient to eat large meats, such as tested and baked wheat, and also birds, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find leather corruption, and it has not reached the bone, then cover it all, and pour over it, then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or a vein, which cannot be stopped by poultice, then cut the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and that you put this powder into them so that fire has moved them.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and mix it finely, and apply the powder to the wound, and bind it tightly, until it has completely healed and joined together; and then bind it well, and leave it undisposed, unless it swells, for we do not bandage the medicine while it is still unwell.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never make any of this powder unless you have incense and dragon's blood, but let fire move the wound alone.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fire has moved the wound, at least put some of this powder on it; but put on some digestible ointments or bread made from water and honey until it heals; then treat it with other treatments until it is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with small needles; and I will tell you hereafter about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the throat and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the throat where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the throat, then there is no other art than to let the cure take place, and not put anything restraining on it, because it harms the throat and makes it retract; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the throat is cold, and its extension with the brain, which is the highest bone; but be the medicine soft, as warm water mixed with oil rosin, and boiled water too, and other stones of a mine according to this manner, and wet oils.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, then treat until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he is thin and full of bowels, then cut into the flesh or deeper; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding comes from it, then stop it, and cauterize as needed; and if his throat is sore or swollen, then cut it away, and guard its course, so that meat goes through, if he cuts his throat on the chin of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it back to its natural shape; and then binds forward, and leaves for some days, then treats with ointments that are different until he is healed; and if the wound has impressed into the bone, then cut it out; and if there are pieces of bone, then throw them away all, and leave them if you cannot get them, then leave as long as the wound rots, and be sick and let the issue come out; and if the wound is fresh, then powder it with the powder that I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then heal it as I said in my chapter on the plague.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the lance or sword wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance or sword wound, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound to see if the patient has wind in his bowels: for then the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh all throughout the body, then do not put the powder on at once, nor tie it up so that it does not move freely, and let the body rest, and ease the pain; but if you have no ointment, put raw cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient lie on the wound for three days, or four, or more; then will come spasm, or a bad tremor of the whole body, or strangulations; and when you see the bones moving, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the boils and other cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot be healed, operate and then make sure there are no fistulas; thus as it should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is deep, or in the back, then treat with what is in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, use powder, and if it has broken into pieces, clean out the wound, and deal with any lodged objects; and if there are no lodged objects, let the wound fester, so as to facilitate extractions; and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	the breaking of the womb
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	the rupture of the womb is great and small and small; therefore a large wound does not break the intestines or the nerves of the intestines, because of the intrusion of air; and the stitch is more difficult, and there is no less pain from a small wound than from a large one, so that we put the intestines back in one place after another, whether they are warm or cold; for the intestines swell sometimes until they feel cold, if we put them back in one place, and because of this they feel pain; and let us know that the rupture of the womb is according to three ways: the common stitches come into the stitch of the womb, and the stitch of the other wounds of the body and the other proper stitches are common with the other wounds; and yet they are more proper with the stich of the womb, and I will say each one separately and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is foreseen, and there is something to be done, it is by one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said; or because the intestines are swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, heat it by the third way: moisten a sponge or I mold a cloth in warm water only, or you cook it in hot water and saffron and cumin and spice, and rinse the intestines until they are swollen; and never do this with restraint, and let it rest so that it swells.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestines with water or cook it, for by this is the entrance to a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound with the instrument with which we chop hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to let it rest, that we do not cut it unless there is great need; and this is the instrument to split it: if you cut it from inside out and not, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine comes out, if you can put it back in its natural place in its proper position, for that is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the part of the loins of the belly, let the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if the wound is in the part of the loins, let the head and the chest be raised higher than the parts that are wounded, and also the tear in the belly is in one of the two parts, so you have to arrange it so that the part that is wounded more is higher than the other; and thus it is necessary to treat what I said in large wounds and small.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, dress the patient, then take two sharp needles and thread with strong thread, according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then leave a little space from the head of the wound, and insert a needle or more, depending on the width of the wound, then leave II inches of space, and insert another needle; then draw the double thread through the needle from both sides, then assemble the two heads of the wound together, and leave II inches of space, and insert another needle; then draw the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this with needles depending on what you need to do with the needles, until all the wound is sutured; and the needles are fine, small and large, because the fine needles go through the whole cloth, and the too large ones cannot enter well: therefore it is necessary that they are fine; and it is not good to push the needles too far from the edge of the cloth and the skin, so that they do not pierce and open the wound before the suture; then tie the heads of the needles, so that they do not hurt the patient when he sleeps, and I put blankets or drapes over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; and this method of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because the second stitch is common, and is that you assemble the two heads of the skin and the II heads of the flesh together with a needle or more, depending on what you need to do with the needles; then when you have pierced these heads all together, return the needle to the part where you began, in the way they sew clothes; and leave an inch or less between each stitch. This stitch is seven, and I sewed a wound that had once been cut with a knife, and was two palm-widths long, and there were two palms-widths of intestines, and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought the intestine back when it had been outside for 22 hours, and the wound was sewed up until it was 15 days old, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miricle was that he died, and I did not cure him with oil, because I was in a place where we could not get any, but I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two methods of sewing: take the needle and thread it from the outside part all the way to the inside; when it has gone through the other side, take the knot of the thread and tie it tightly, so that the stitch is secure; this is how you should sew, just as the tanner does when he sews leather, and so that the stitch is complete once the skin has been joined together.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, which Galien describes properly, is if it were so that there is no suture, which joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the heads to the other head in this way: take a needle or thread near the end of the eye; pierce the skin only, leaving the two heads joined; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part inside to the two heads; then pierce each of the two parts from the outside part inside to the two heads, in the two other threads that are on this or that side; and this is the method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galien says this in his text, and no one disputes it, that you should sew the abdomen to two needles or threads, and you must insert one needle on one side and the other on the other, in the way of those who sew with a running stitch; and know that when the tear is in the middle of the abdomen, this type of sewing is more painful than any other type of abdominal sewing.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l'ait muee, si remet arer l'intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l'ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se tu n'as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu'ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k'il soit sanez.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of any other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound is communicating with the main members, then you should moisten another light one with warm oil or rose oil, and put it between the joints, and clean the swelled areas; and if it feels pain or putsrefaction in the balls, and often happens, then wash it with black wine, and more importantly, putrefaction comes from the gut; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jejunum" cannot be cured when it is torn, and this is because of the arrangement of veins, and the subtlety of all the body, and the proximity of its nature to children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the tip of the intestine comes out of the wound, put it back behind as well as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned black, you must find the place that is black, since there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the ties, and hang the two heads up from the part of the wound farther away so that the extraction comes when the tip comes out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of a rupture on the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some places, as I have seen that one that was torn or stabbed by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and wind; so I put curative things on it as well as I could, and did not stop applying the medicine until it was healed, and the wounds closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et when I saw him well, I doubted that the patient would have ill in his belly; and there was no harm, but waited in better dispositions, and feasting and drinking; and no experimenter said that when he has a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound by some way: take two big teeth, then join the lips of the wound, and when the teeth have opened the mouth, put her on the two lips, so that she draws her mouth from above; and then he covers his head, and this stays like this that he cannot release it, then puts another tooth after in that way as before, until the wound is all bound; and stop the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief wound is in the intestine, and there is no harm to the patient, and the intestine can be bound by some way: take the chief of this intestine fil that is muterly cut off, and then bind to the chief of this fil one fine thread cut off from the intestine of an animal, in some way: take the chief of this thread of intestine that is muterly cut off, and then tie to the chief of this fil a fine linen thread, then bottle the thread into the needle, and when you cut the intestine, and turn it back in the tear; and this way of sewing with teeth is more strong than according to the path of engagement and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, most surely when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no medicine or cure but subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula or that he may
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	That all wounds and abscesses, when they have healed, are called "fistula" in general, and most especially when they have scarred and bent.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And a fistula is according to the theoretical definition, hard and white, so that there is no pain, and it is also scarred like a bird's feather; and never clear bowels, and sometimes thick, sometimes thin, and never flat, and I have already spoken in the division of wounds about how any wound that has not healed, and does not heal, this is because of one of the VIII causes: namely, due to smallness of blood or corruption; or because it is evil in itself; or because there is something hard inside, and on the lips, which does not allow birth; or because there is too much bowels; or the place is rotten, and the substance is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good for cure; or because what corrupts is of a pestilential nature; or because digestion is late in that region and health is late to arrive, and is delayed by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I tell you the remedy for fistula, which is made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula can occur in all limbs of the body; for it comes from some vein, artery, nerve, or viscera, or from any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or from any joint of the hands or feet; and if so much as it comes to the principle limb, and to similar parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas that are of this manner are of great difficulty in the cure, and there is nothing but work and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the principle limb, and to similar parts, I have finished telling you; and you have promised to cure it, and you have seen it clearly, take a piece of rawhide or iron, if the fistula is straight, see it with your hand; and if the fistula is twisted, see it with a thin piece of pliable rope, for the rope will bend around its curvature; and if the fistula has ruptured hands, and you cannot see it well by rope, see it with a needle, for the needle will penetrate through the thickness of the rupture, and cleanse it; then see it carefully with your power, to know whether there is bone or nerve, and it is thoroughly healed, and ask the sick person if he feels pain when you press it with your hand, and where he feels the pain; and when you have truly known the place where it is, and whether it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, see it according to what I have said, and break up the foulness and rotten bones that are within; then cure it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right place, it is necessary that you see it thoroughly, as well as you can, then put wet rawhides in medicine water, and bottle them up to the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrode the superfluity that is reserved at the bottom; and then put ointments that spread the infection with a fresh unguent, as long as it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, see it with a cauterization as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, see it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If in a primary member there is pain or if the bone is broken and there is corruption and blackening, the king should be treated for this as long as the corruption has not reached the entire bone, then cure it of any internal injury until he is healthy; and if he is not healed, return him to his earlier state, knowing that you have not yet finished: if you uncover and examine until you are at the bottom, then remove all the corruption, then restore the joint; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too complete so you cannot come; if there is no other problem except that it weakens by nature; and if there is one small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with pliers, if you extract it with a suitable instrument for this, and if there are many bones, then pull them all, taking care not to leave any behind; and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no mistake or fear, chop and moistening and pulling, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that prevents putrefaction, and let it remain until the sores are eaten away by the bones, and thereafter the bones will be looser; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, keep so long the putrefaction until the whole bone is black, then cover the wound; and if there is a great deal of corruption and it comes up to the root of the bone; if it is convenient, bind and cover everything up to the place of corruption, and then cure it until it is reunited; and I will tell you about a fistula which happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was a young man of about thirty years who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a great abscess, and had no apparent cause for opening it; but he looked at it because of his foolishness, and opened it so much that much matter came out, and became a fistula, and it came to such a pass that all went away from him bowing and moistening his body; and many times he was cured in two years, and there was no skill in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was cured, and what ran out through the perforations to great extent; and the color of his body became red, and his skin had a yellow hue.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of those openings and then searched all the openings, and I found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly set up a tent in one of these openings and then searched all the openings, and I found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg. I soon realized that there was a section of bone coming through one of the openings, and it was corroded and decayed, with the corrosion reaching down into the bone; I could feel the decaying part of the bone, and then I took care not to let there be any more corruption, otherwise I would have to remove it; so I started to apply medicine to the wound over a long period of time, but it wouldn't stick; and then I started again, and discovered the bone just as before, and found that the corrosion was continuing in the bone, which I felt, and then removed it, and then sutured the opening; but I couldn't hold the sutures in place because I cut into the bone by accident, and the patient couldn't tolerate it, and out of fear of death I had to perform the surgery again.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car por l'evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l'os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n'ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l'aleir ne a venir.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	Because of the bloody evacuation, he was completely healed, and in its place he born a hard bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or opposite from anything at all, nor in his air nor in his coming. And if the bone is broken in any place of the skeleton, then it should be done like this: take a thread, and strain it to the head of the bone that has opened, and command anyone to extend it upward; and put another larger thread than the first one on top of the bone, and tie it to the char that is over the bone, and remove the head, so that you draw the broken char out of its place, and uncover the char on top of the place where you see or feel the corruption, so that the thread does not burn the char; and put a fire or a heated stone over the bone to cover the broken char; and it should be done as often as one can see and feel the corruption, and another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the jaw is corroded and does not open at all, and the corrosion is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole skull; then place a red-hot brand, and then sew the corruption from one part to another, and let the thread run into the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corrosion is in the joint, then cover the corroded joint, and let it run on the bone where the other side is; and if the corrosion is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other ache than that of covering; and if the corrosion is at the knuckle of the hand or at the knuckle of the foot, then it is very painful, but nevertheless you should inquire about the corrosion, how it opens; and clean it completely in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you; and know that the saw and the threads for covering these bones are many, according to the size of the bones and their appearance, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it is necessary to arrange each instrument for every appearance of work; and know that the work will show you the instrument in which you will be skilled, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument in which you are skilled according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the dislocation is due to moisture or displacement, and when you have applied medicine for the corrosion by the cure of medicines, and it does not benefit, then cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from this life, or from the malice, which is greater, of the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, as if they were burned by fire, and after that blackening, the corrosion takes hold of one member to another, and permeates throughout the whole body; so hurry up with covering, and if it is due to the percussion of certain poisonous animals, such as sea scorpions or adders or similar things, if the corrosion comes to the head of the two limbs, cover it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, and if the cap goes up to the joint, so that corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, let the cap go to the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue; and all this do when the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes in the first joint, let the cap go after the other joint; and if it comes or goes, let the cap go all the way down; and if it climbs up the leg, let the cap go to the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means except that the patient be laid on his back; and tie the member tightly from above and below, and extend one minister of the string downstream, and another minister of the string upstream, and loosen the tourniquet that is between the two strings to the wide spatulate, as long as the bone is uncovered; then put the cap or silk, and put a cloth of linen on each side, so that the silk does not touch the healthy place, and let it come to the patient another injury and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood runs when you work, then cauterize the place very carefully, or put some powder on it that constricts it; and then go back to your medicine until it is complete, and bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to the man at home in a moment: he got a blackness which seemed like fire had burned it, and that corrosion came first from his foot down to the ground, so that it blistered all of the foot; and when the honor saw the corrosion, he covered the foot with copper, and it healed; and a long time later the corrosion returned to the palm of his hand, and came to me, and I put things that strike back after washing his flesh, and I could not stop the corrosions; and he said that he would have me cut off his hand, and I did not want to do that, because I hoped to recover the material; and I was also afraid that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's virtues were weak; and he became completely despairing, and returned to his land, and covered his hand with copper, and it healed; and I only know this by hearsay, except for what others might do if they have to.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes when the abscess is in its place, and it delays so long that it makes a great gathering of bowels; and then it rots and perforates, and leaps the bowels, and stays the eyes, also as our vassals; and the leather which is above is also thin like the drapes loosed, and does not corrode up to the bone, nor up to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and is not called "fistule"; but if it is so elongated that it comes up to the bone completely, then it is called "fistule"; and the leather is so that you cover that leather all around, and most especially when it is thin, also as our drapes; and it does not burn for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are certain that the leather is corroding, and corruption has not yet been completed, and the leather is as thick as a char; then put this medicine made of Egyptian medicine into it: take oil and alum, and mix them evenly, and put the leather in the fire until the medicine turns red, and becomes thicker also as honey; and then take from that according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and clisterize the breast, and draw out the pus; and leave the medicine there for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this many times, until the breast is completely cured, and the badness of the disease is gone; and never use the medicine of water and ashes when this Egyptian medicine is not present, but you press ashes from a vine, and pour water on them, and then let it flow, and clisterize it, until you know that the breast is completely cured; and if the patient cannot tolerate the medicine, or the Egyptian medicine and water of ashes do not work for him, then make a clistere with honey and wine which has been made sweet, so that the sweetness of the honey has the property of curing and washing, and the wine makes the disease better; and when you have done this, and are certain that the breast is completely cured, then use this: press out an ointment very finely, and make it with oil of roses and wine; or clisterize it with various medicines and scents, about which I have spoken in the treatment of smells; and if the opening of the breast is small, and the catheter for the clistere cannot enter, then enlarge it a little with an iron tool, and put it in a tent made of the Egyptian scent or basilicon scent, until it has been enlarged; and if the wound is too large, then leave it to open so much that the catheter can enter, and if the opening that gueses bowe is above, then take it off or make it lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in perfect order, let them not be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the belly as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bowels run down to the lowest place that they can reach, for when the bowels are in perfect order, let them not be disturbed; and if you cannot cover the belly as you see fit, arrange it in such a way: that the bowels run lightly downward, leaving nothing of the bowels behind; and take medicines that strengthen it over the skin, and lie on a linen drape that covers all the skin; then cover with more force at the place where the belly pokes out a little wider than at the first, for ointments are applied according to the quantity of the protrusion, and put it over the belly hole to support the bowels, and do not remove the large drape until after many days once; and those who are on the belly hole often remove to remove the bowels, and know what runs from the bowels, whether it is venom or pus or enough or digested or indigestive; and take care that the patient feels pain or no, and if there is an abscess or not, and how the medicine has spread in a certain way and you see the nature that rises over the belly hole, know that the breasts are already beginning to move, and come closer to them; then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, if you change another drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become heavy and swollen after many days, for her breasts are not yet developed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison comes slowly after a long time, then do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are homes whose late healing of their wounds and those that heal in the opposite way; and if breasts become heavy and swollen after many days, knowing that the breasts do not develop; and if the breasts are delayed in developing, and are swollen, then take medicines that are moist in substance but dry in virtue, as is done with astringent; for there is much vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take astringency continuously, and put it on with oil of rose, and aromatize it with equal parts of vine garlic, which is also like rose-water flour; then cook it and use it; and in this way, if astringency is taken alone, then take honey and aloe and incense, and grind them together, and powder them and put them on the honey I spoke about, and use them; and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured with this cure, then know that corruption is made perfect, and causes pressure in the bone, or hard limbs, or joints; if the cure of the fistula-like cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the nail bed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	is a nail bed that grows out of the pouch of the hand, or foot, or perhaps grows in another two; and when it is torn, and no care is taken, so it comes The aposteme is chaus, and corront and giete bowe as long as they corront the root of the nail, and perhaps corront all; and comes li corrosions until the bone, so much that there is a painful pungent pain, and is the two chiés broad, and is the color fux.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that is left of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy; and if the nail is pressing on the flesh, and beginning to prick, and bleeding, then you must cut off the nail tip that pricks the flesh, and bottle it up, and cut off the remaining nail tip carefully and lightly, and put on the remnant of the nail burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then treat with ointments until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corrosion est dans l'os, alors le cope et le traire fort, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois le douaire corrompre, alors le cope comme il a été dit avant, ensuite guérir jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri ; et s'il est blessé et gonflé, et sent une grande douleur, alors il convient que tu le guérisses d'abord ; puis cope l'ongle avec du spatule obtenu en coupant travers de dessus, et garde que la coupe ne vienne pas à la tête qui est sous l'ongle, car le patient sentirait trop de douleur ; et s'il arrivait, alors mettre quelque chose pour apaiser.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	La douleur du sourdoit de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The two hands of some men are entirely flesh, and in others there is bone, and in neither has an nail, and the birth in either is at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born with two legs do not move, and those who are born with a joint between the two, may yet move; the size of that which is charnous is light, in this way: cut it at its root with a broad chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who are born at the root of the joint must be carefully treated; if you hold them tight.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the derrien nout, it is necessary that you first cut off the flesh in roundness up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, and then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, or by the joining of a wound, or by fire burning, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you think that you can cut off the joint, so that it returns to its natural form; then place between two fabric pieces or drape-like materials wet with rosin, so that it does not soud; or place between two thin pieces of cloth, until the legs are souded together, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses deux avec la paume, s'il còpe celle soudure si com il convient.
des vils	The dislocated shoulder is moved back into place, and if it does not move easily, it must be forced back into position with care.
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	And there are many evil wrapped up viscera full of excess melancoliousness that come from the members of the body; and more is seen in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should not give him any more purging medicines, and then heal the foundation of the temple.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment for iron is according to two methods: one is that you kop them, and then draw out the black blood; and the other method is that you hold the vein, and then draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The following are the methods for treating iron: First, raise the leg of the healthy person very strongly with hot water until the large blood is thinned out, then draw out the leg of the sick person from above the hip all the way to the knee; then kop the vein either in one place, or in two, or in three, widely open, then drain and draw out the black blood by your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the virtue of the sick person can bear; then bind it, and command that he bathe his meat with black blood; and then restart the evacuation and dressing when the veins are clean, and keep doing so until the patient is better.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it badly, but do not cover it; and deal with it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the shape of iron with which one covers the vis if it is bent, and do not cut it, so that it does not cover the vein; and it is heavily corroded, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture; and perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this causes the decay of the skin that comes from within the body, like a snake creeping and curling up, destroying between skin and meat.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this disease are that it comes to the leg a very great swelling, then the places change, and the vein begins to come out, also as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the sign of the beginning of this disease are that it comes to the leg a very great swelling, then change the places, and let the vein begin to come out, also as the root of a plant. When the head has been opened, so that you wrap a piece of cloth around one third and a half up to two thirds., and tie it, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time that there is no more than a point left, if the cloth is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it over its root, until it is all out; for if you cover it, it enters into the char, and causes an abscess and putrefaction where they are, so that this thing requires little by little to be treated, until there remains nothing but the root; and there is never this vein when it is treated of V palms long, or of X, and one hundred and fifty years came to me, at which she was treated of X palms long, and when you cover it, if it comes up or down, and pierces all the way through, so that everything is out; and let the matter that is inside be emptied, and bring medicines in turn against putrefaction every day, then heal him as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never use this hand for any work, and least of all when it opens in the joint of the foot, or the foot itself, because from there comes much loss, and because it often rains; so then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which are born between leather and cart
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff disease," for it often attacks buffaloes, and it is a small worm that borns between leather and cart, and goes everywhere ascending and descending, and feels well from one member to another, until it destroys the skin where it goes, and sometimes enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you treat and draw it out, do not be able to force it but when it goes: then, indeed, should you pull the joint well up and tightly with a strong rope, then cut it off and draw it out, and let it fall completely into the cart, and if you don't find it, cauterize it with fire from above so that it dies; and the greatest damage it does is when it corromps the oil, as we have said. And if you see it coming near the oil at the head, then strain it off well, then cut it off and draw it out. And it is necessary to use medicine that dissolves the bad humors from the skin, and to wash with meat that is corrupted by putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of pain which comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and moves from limb to limb; and I have seen this one that I tell you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered some of her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and I felt it afterwards, it rose as high as a worm does on its own, and went up as quick as if it were silver, when it comes from one place to another; the pain departed from that place, and stuck in her shoulder, and then a little later corrupted all over her body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she twisted herself again around her body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I have never heard of such a disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	All the same, I wish that many want to move pain from one to another, but I do not want it, so as I saw in the woman; and I thought that was for those who have a dry chest, and the veins uncovered, and because it seems that wind is forced; and does not appear according to this reason to those who are delicious, and who have moist chests and veins restored.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease healed, and the patient feels that pain, if it is as we have said, then put the bandage above and below the wound, and then cover it with something until that wind becomes stable in place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not get your hairs, then cure this person who brings wind, as if pills are foul, and pills of serapin, and similar things.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	are various, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body from which they come.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	are varied, for there are some with large points, and others with small, and curved, and some that are soldered; and those with two angles, and some with tongues, and some with pieces; and one that pierces in no member at all, but in a way: or in a principal member it pierces, as the brain, heart, liver, pancreas, rein, intestine, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it therefore pierces in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears to you: it is necessary that you wash yourself from the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after many preparations; and when this deadly sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, if you draw it out, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l'os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d'entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t'aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s'elle n'est ens.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	And the sign of the shoulder when it is torn or pierced, and feels as if it were stuck to something hard, not empty; and sometimes it makes a noise like a bird, and there is black pain, and cold sweat, and fainting: so you know that death may come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has pierced is that there is no pain in the wound and foam shoots out from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gasps for air and shivers.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow has entered the chest under the skin, it pierces the small ribs; and causes great pain and sorrow, and he gasps for air; and all the limbs move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow has entered the belly, perhaps a piece of meat that is not digested shoots out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow has entered the belly, and from the intestine there shoots forth no fiber, then there is no hope for healing or extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow has entered the bladder, and urine shoots out with a spray, and the patient feels great pain: for the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, if it is fair and smooth and the neck and throat and shoulder and aid and spine at the back and forelegs and legs, and the limb-like, are safe according to several arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the neck or artery, and it is not poison, as I will tell you that happened to me, do not do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow got in the throat at the root of the neck: I tried it, and took it out on the other side by cutting off the fat of the ear, and was healed without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I tried it on a target with an arrow that got in the fat of oil from the paper, and the arrow was re-inserted, and I only got to the tip towards the wood, and the arrow was big like a turquoise arc, all my ears were healed; the game was healed, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And I dragged an arrow from the Christian's throat; and the arrow was Arabic to his ears: I recognized the barbs, and dragged it carefully while dragging it, and healed the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And I dragged an arrow from the man's chest or belly, and thought he was dead; and then after thirty days, if he did not move in any way, I cut the arrow, and fitted it, and dragged it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man who has an arrow in his chest or back, and the wound is closed over it; do not remove the arrow inside him, and do not change his natural position, nor find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man whose arrow was in his face, and the wound was closed over it; and thus he suffered great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I brought a scarab to the king's palace from the princes' house, which was injured at the top of its neck, and it was slightly inclinate on the right side; and the scarab was all healed. I was called to treat after it had been injured for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I put on it all day long, and I did not feel it; but he felt pain and piercing in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the scarab I put on it a plaster of turpentine and digestive, so that its legs did not inflame; and I saw the legs of the scarab.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put on the plaster every day, and quickly healed the wound, and delayed it for a long time, so that he felt the scarab inside his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put medicine to the wound with corrosive water by hand for so long as it was open, and tried it, and felt the chief of the arrow which fixed itself in place; then I applied medicine to the opening of the wound with that corrosive water until the head of the arrow appeared clearly; and it passed well between the termini of IIII months, and then I enlarged the wound so that I put the pliers, and squeezed from one side and the other, and could not draw them out; then I ceased not to study and devise ways of instruments, until I took one day as pliers well made, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I held it, and I closed up the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the judge judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and was sewn up the wound, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or t'ai dit la qualité de l'extraction d'aucunes saettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sur ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sur bien poc grant chose, et surceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve neuf oevre, et neuf instrument, au dessendement des choses estranges qui avienent en cet art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	Or I told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your treatment to what I do not say, for books cannot entirely comprehend it; but master surgeons compare with a very small amount of something, and with what is present and failing, test nine techniques and nine instruments for the removal of foreign objects that occur in this art.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it remain as long as the flesh is rotted inside, and the exit is blocked; and likewise if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, let it stay there for a few days, and then pull it out. And so it comes out, and if it does not come out, pierce it from all sides with a very fine needle, as long as the inside flesh is stretched, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes through one of the brains, and some of the accidents that I have said open up for the patient: if you do not pull it out, but leave it as long as it remains even after a few days, because if the arrow comes to the syfac, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not stuck further than the socket of the bone, and does not come to the syfac, and the patient remains for some days without any bad accidents, then the device for pulling it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck so deeply that it cannot come out, then I will give you some relief, as I told you; and then heal the wound as long as it remains clean.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow has been stuck in the chest so deeply that it cannot be seen, and you want to take a good look at it; and if you feel it, then pull it with a suitable instrument; and if you cannot pull it because of the pain in the wound, and because of the thickness of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein behind it, then let the wound heal as much as possible; and if you can, pull the arrow out, and if it has ears at both ends to hold it in place, break or bend those ears as carefully as you can so that you do not damage the arrow; and be careful that you do not break the arrow when you pull it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then let him go until he is out of harm's way, then extract it, because extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the extraction of blood makes him opposite to you, then provide him with what we have said in our chapter on the preparation of the salve; and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and do not hesitate to extract the arrow without danger, soon or late, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he had when the arrow entered his body, for this is the greatest aid that can be done, and if you cannot, then follow the signs that we show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or which does not hit anything, or whose skin is swollen in a particular place, so that it can be seen or felt: cut it then, as long as the nails can reach it, and then extract it: do it now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then take it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be removed, leave it for a while longer, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out; and if there is an arrow in it, let the whole arrow come out by pushing it; and if there is a splinter, and you see that it is near, administer the point of the tool so that the point of the splinter enters into the hole of the tool; and then push it out, and if the splinter has been chewed, push the tool with its point entering to the end, in order to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is lodged, then it is necessary that you cut all the way through where the arrow is lodged; if you can do so, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow pierces you in the belly or bladder or side, and it is close, then you may cover it with a cloth, if you have one; and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound, as this is the work. And cure it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the forceps used to remove arrows are similar to an eye, and thus it should be done as follows:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do this: large, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the bit, however, is like the beak of a bird, to catch at the tip of the arrow, as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the forceps for thrusting and holding are as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins of the neck common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	XXXI veins from which one is cured are XVI, that is to say: II batans which are after the ears, called "herbech"; and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and II veins which are in II lamellae of II hairs, called "aspires"; and the vein which is under the forehead; and the vein which is at the head of the neck; and the II girth which are on the neck; and the II veins which are above the lips, and these are called "augeherich"; and II veins which are outside the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one is commonly cured are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and is on the left side of the chest, and it is called by the common people "vein of the head"; and its companion is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and the basal, and it is called by the common people "vein of the cubit"; and the basal is on the right side of the chest, and it is called by the common people "vein of the belly", and is on the phloem, and is that from which one is cured, which opens manifestly above the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l'auriculaire et l'anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinne: l'une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee "nesse", que est en la cheville de l'autre costei; et en l'autre jambe sont III voinne desoz celles.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The salvature is the vein that runs between the index and middle fingers, and if it is injured; and in the leg and where the foot is there are three salvatures: one is dislocated from the corbucle of the left side, and the second is a sprain at the ankle on the right side; and the salvature called "nesse" which is at the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three salvatures dislocated from these. The salvatures that are behind the ears help with old catarrh and migraines; and the qualities of the salvature, as I have told you, are that you place your hand over the head of the sick person, and rub the spot where the salvature is located with a rough cloth; then remove the disease from the neck using a hook, until both salvatures appear behind the ears, depending on the head: feel them with your fingers, and when you feel a pulsing, sign it with your index finger; then take the lance, and pierce it through the salvature all the way to the bone, then lift your hand up, and cut off and remove the blood, until it stops; then tie it up, until it has healed. I have already spoken about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The medicine of the two arteries that are in the two temples, so as to be emaciated and old, and acostumed to dry the eyes and the tears to the eyes; and the quality of the medicine is such as I have said: and it is that the patient should stretch his neck, until the two veins appear open; and feel the little pols on your second finger, then sign with your thumb; then lift up the syringe from above your second index finger, and squeeze the liquid out, and lift up the vein, and tie it off, as you did in the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then unbind the patient, and put your second finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then tie the form, and leave it until it is healed. And we have spoken of their binding and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The medical practitioner should instruct the patient to leave the hairs long and even; and if they prick at their base, to hold them steady so that they do not move until they grow.
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	To prevent hair loss, the practitioner should instruct the patient to leave their hairs long and even; if they prick at their base, they should hold them steady so that they remain in place until the hairs grow. The practitioner should then cut into the vein, using a sharp instrument held firmly in one's hand or another object, and release an amount of blood corresponding to the quantity desired; then, gently break the patient's collarbone, holding the vein fixed at all times, and let the blood flow as needed.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not recommended that the fire be too hot; and if one cuts across the bone, as it is thin, the fire may jump and cause injury.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is burned, then break it open slightly; then make a cut, as much as you need to, and then wrap in cotton, and wrap well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the vein of the nose bleeds, then let it run a little; then make a cut, as much as you need to, and then wrap in cotton, and wrap well. The blood of the nose if it runs, and if it is sudden, and diseases of the face, such as migraine and pain that comes into the face, and even when it is old; and the quality of the blood: so let the patient strangle his neck, and draw his nose to your left hand, and take a subtle, long flame, and put it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well, and the blood will start to run now; and do not go too far with the cutting, and make the cut according to your need, then let it rest overnight, because it is soon healed; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The medicine of the two limbs is by means of stretching the leg, and by constricting the mesenteries, and for many diseases, and for empيتين, and for corrosives, and for herpes, and for ichor; and the quality of the medicine is that the patient should extract his collarbone from both sides, as we have said; and let the master stand on top of the patient's chest, and let the patient lie down on one side, then cut the vein of the long leg a little widely, then bandage it temporally, or as much as is necessary; then do the same in the other limb, then tie up the ligature, and extract the veins gently, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	The medicine of the two limbs is by means of stretching the leg, and by constricting the mesenteries, and for many diseases, and for empيتين, and for corrosives, and for herpes, and for ichor; and the quality of the medicine is that the patient should extract his collarbone from both sides
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The pain from the veins of the lips that go up to meet each other in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and the splits in the lips, and the neuritis and enthoris.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	The quality of the pain from the veins that go up to meet each other in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and the splits in the lips, and neuritis and enthoris is such that it makes the patient sit before you, and strains his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and examine the veins, one on the right and the other on the left, and you will know by this that they are black, and by this that the entor of them is small black veins: so cope the largest of each pair, and do the same for the two sets of veins above and below, since it is a similar manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the disease of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Regarding the disease of the tongue caused by the opening of a vein at the base of the skull, which leads to strangeness in the voice and is due to constriction of the throat and diseases of the eye and mouth; and the quality of the patient so that the sick person faints between your hands before the sun, and he falls back his tongue, and looks up black in every side a vein: then heal both of them, and do not be too perfect, because they are veins.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the neck that are commonly treated are healed according to two methods: or with a sharp knife large and long, or with a fine olive wood as with neck knives, and they are called "aneurysms"; and they are large and fine according to the size and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame is thin if it is named mouth, and wide as you see.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins that are flat and full of thick blood, and that contain thick blood and trouble; and this is the form of the flame olive.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle pointed, and it is to save the veins that are subtle, where there is subtle blood yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The rescue of the bazoo, who is one of these veins, so help the diseases that are dislodged the throat, and where the neck, and where the pee, and where the belly; and it comes to the resuer that he rescues well, and that he wares from the artery that is dislodged.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and the blood comes out, if it is necessary to stop it, as I said; and it must not be grabbed by the fire, but cut off like this.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	Et si li basilic n'apert manifestement, si covert que tu l'estrois, et change une autre; ou tu veux aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la veine emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flamme ane sil, si com nos avons dit.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if the basilisk does not open clearly, then it is necessary that you remove it and change another; or if you want to avoid a rain of it, or to heal in the place of it the vein that goes into the arm: she opens clearly; and wrap it with fire as we have said. So if you see the place of the healing, then it is necessary also that you remove the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the spot of insertion, and then place the arm, and wrap the vein with fire; and beware that you do not hurt in the artery when you see the pulse escape, for it is from the artery: so avoid.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see coming out on top as urine from a child, and the sap is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: then hasten and place your arm over it for a long time, then open your arm so the sap goes out, which often happens; and hold back the breast, and let it rest there, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move him until he is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the sap does not go out, and it comes to you, and the medicine is not given to you, if the artery opens, for the head of the shoulder is retained; stop the sap.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a branch of fig, and cut it, and take one half and put it well together with the other for a day; if the sap stops, it is good; if not, if you cure it, as we have said, with the powders that stop blood; and the stopping should not be too great in several situations for the small size of the wound, and the power of the ligament of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu'elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu'elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu'il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s'il point trop em parfant, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s'il n'apert en aucuns homes por sa subtilitat, si covient que tu lou saines de l'estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If the vein is between the two nerves, make the incision long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment for the cephalic vein is to tie it with fire, and if that fails, use the olive or marten flame, for it is the safest of all veins because it does not have nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	All the same, it is better to seek the lighter path and not grieve if it fails the first time, and start over again; and by chance may it swell for some men, since it fails the first time, but it does not grieve.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends according to your mind.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about healing is that healing should only be sought for the purpose of maintaining health and preventing future diseases; and it must be done in one of the three directions: head, abdomen, or chest; and it should be done at the beginning of fasting, in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it should be done on the first day of the month, or every three hours on the second, third, or fourth day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n'a point d'oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc'a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc'a septime.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The patient who has recovered from illness does not have a specific time limit, but whenever there is a need for bloodletting, it should be done at any time of day or night; and it is not appropriate to treat children before they are 12 years old, nor women other than those who have been pregnant for four months up to seven months. It is not appropriate to treat the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone is to be treated, in whatever way, it is appropriate that he fastens the intestines of a light clister, if there has been a recent retention of urine, so that the veins do not draw out the excess harmful pus into the main members; and it is not appropriate to treat anyone who is too much swollen with meat, or who is greedy, as long as it lasts, or who is dehydrated; and it is not appropriate to treat after a colic passion, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, excessive female activities, labor, staying up late, overindulging in food, drink, or medicine, and this should be avoided; then enter or bathe, if anything does not harm him, to subtilely remove the fever, and you shall be treated from the pis entor la tierce, as we have said; and guard yourself that day from work, and from picking, and from lust, and from similar things; and be quiet and moderate, and let the healer treat someone above you, and rub his arms twice or three times, then pull the cord gently, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot be treated; and then rub the healer's wrist with his left hand a little, until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the healer with the flame of a small drop of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein where he is to treat, so that the vein does not hurt or cause pain.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventosité, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	For there are veins that run like strings for the surgeon, and some are so flat they can easily be burned; when you put them on fire, when you remove the flame, you cannot open the vein, and so you are one of those; and if you open the vein the first time, it is good; but if not, then you begin again a little lower or higher on the body, unless the legs are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the legs are swollen and the patient hopes for better, let him or her rest a day or two, and do not bind the arm: perhaps he will get an abscess; nor go into water, but begin the surgery again if it pleases him; and if the wound is small or there is little blood flow, cut directly to the flame; and work a little on the body, so that the leg swells; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the wound open, do not make a bandage, and put a little oil thereon, for it softens the course of blood, and the oil in this place is like the oil that makes a bandage; and thus administer the oil to each wound as you dress them, so that the course of blood may be stopped; and also it does well to triecle and bow the eyes when you put it on the wound; if it is too thick, it will split it.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there is a large abscess, which often happens, especially when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put a damp sponge on the wound and wrap it in cloth for an hour; and it is good that you do this after the flow of blood from the vein has stopped, and if it remains at the wound for several days without any black or green color, it does no harm; and if you see it, put any thing of aloe or mirrhe, remised in juice of calamus, monstere, or any other.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance in the leg of the Basilica: then place your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot under pressure from your hand, that is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid placing anything on it that we have said, for by chance within the cort of the artery; but make I dry out with plaster to harden the place, then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it is red, and if you see lou thick, let it stand until it is thin, and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for those who are weak and out of shape, and need to extract the blood, make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for those who are strong, do the reverse, and heal them slowly and often, and let it heal by cutting across, not by piercing; and this way of healing is safe from decay of blood and corruption of nerves, and it is better than long-term healing.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose hearts are sick, it is necessary to give moist bread in grape juice; if it is heated, it must be given three or four times and if it is of a cold complexion, before the sick, moist bread in syrup made with muslin, or with honey-like aromatic syrup with spices, as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it sweats at the sick, after the expulsion of three or four pints of blood, it is necessary that it hums brew of char and aromatic subtle syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it vomits up some food and then gets sick again at another time, if it is weakened by great sickness, that it gets well little by little, according to the quantity of its continuing virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who vomits up his arms after the first sickness, and he has a strong fever, so he is sick for seven hours after the first illness, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who vomits up from another part, if he should vomit up the next day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has a fever that burns within his body and brings forth sweat; if so, then draw out great quantity, and widen the wound as much as possible; then that you let all conditions of sickness, and put your hand upon his pulse when he is sick, that death may not come to him in place of sweat, and this happens many times, when the sickness is neglected; and it is not good when you loosen the shoulder, and bring forth blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly; but if it is swollen, let him extend his arm gently, for that would be wrong; but let it lie until he is sick again; or you hold to the tip of the flame until the sweat that comes from the vein is frozen, and put there a little rope dipped in water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the wound runs, let it alone and do not constrict it, as long as the abscess is healing.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires to drain the blood a second time, if it is in that very place again, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that comes out of the arm is in the same place as the vein at the base of the head, because it is composed of the same thing.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of the wound is such that the patient dips his hand in warm water until it is red all over; then let it dry little by little, so that the vein appears clearly, and cut it now on one side, not wide nor long; and make the incision close to the joint of the hand, and if it bleeds, do not rebender the hand in warm water, because we put it more in danger than in cure; and the wound from this vein is more saved from all other veins than he has an artery or a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The medicine of the right hand is good for all liver diseases, and this is how it is done: remove the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein has gone; then cut it across, and chop it all up; do not cut too much, because the nerves are all exposed and naked like the cart; then put the hand back into hot water, so that it does not freeze in the wound, and cannot be taken out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated as much blood as is necessary, if there is a vein, put oil and silk over it to close it tightly, and do the same for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The medicine of this is good for the disease of the neck, and do the same as I told you before about the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The medicine of the shoulder is good for all kinds of diseases that come from the back, such as marital problems, and preventing flowers from growing, and old diseases of the arms, legs, and hips; and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Et the quality of his health is that the patient should put some water in hot water and rub on the vein as long as it burns, and lie down on top of the joint of the foot; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and above the foot go much rain; heal the then or more wide rain, or at the ankle, so that it does not hurt.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are next to it, and heal it as well as a coppice; and let the fire go out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he can't get out of it, put the foot in water and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if he heals the first time, start the second above a little hole because the leg is salty; do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and so do the same for the other leg evenly.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle joint, and its pain reaches the knee when it is for pain.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this pain is that the patient goes or bath, and pulls it from the ankle IV times by twisting, because otherwise the nerve will not open; and if it opens, then you must move it in all ways that you can, and cross it; and it is better that you chop it off, for its root is out, and it is very relented to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not heal it, so that the pain comes out of his foot or back on the little toe, and guard yourself from the water; and make it run as much as you can see the pain, and then untie the ligature, and put it on cotton and hold it; now he is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	vacuum pump
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and the vacuuming is done in two ways: either by pricking and drawing out air, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this vacuum which is without pricking there are twelve parts of the body where it may be placed: one at the top of the head; and another under the chin; and two on either side of the neck; and one in front of the throat; and two on each arm; and two on each leg; and two on each foot; and this vacuuming does not treat a vein until all the body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	Et s'il faut, à cause du mal, venter, ou à cause des habitudes, on les remédiera chaque heure pendant le mois, ou à la fin, et en milieu de temps; car il y a d'autres qui, quand ils doivent venter, ont un poids excessif; et s'il y a ceux qui ont une forte rougeur sur leur visage, sur leur tête, sur leur cou, et une grande obscurité dans leurs yeux; et ceux qui ont une goutte de sang dans leur bouche, et dont la langue est enlevée, et qui ont soif de sang; et s'il y a ceux qui sont étourdis, et voient mal à cause d'un manque de sang, et qui sentent la nausée et la mort et des choses similaires.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and even when it is mid-month, we will order him to ventose after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The medicine for the musket, if it helps with the grief of the head ... which comes to hairs, and does not come except after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in the place of the medicine for the headache, and does not come except for those who are of cold constitution and use, or who have chafed, because that does them a lot of harm; and so it comes to the older ones in using, or those who have cold diseases in their heads.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured of it often become confused, and for this reason the suction cup should be put a little lower down by the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation of the neck is in the place of the cure for the headache and the temple, and because of this it causes constriction of the chest and a kind of pain and repulsion; and so it should be slightly pushed back, for if it holds too tightly, it causes confusion or stomach trouble or elsewhere.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The winds and the pains of the ribs, and the headache, and the blindness and the dizziness, and the strangulation, and the pain at the roots of the teeth; it is in place of the health of the church; and you must order the doctor that he express his hand to apply it, that he does not cut the artery, and do not bring about a loss of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The winds and the pains of the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is in place of the health of the lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The pains of the shoulders are due to heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The pains of the arms are due to three large veins; for they bring about the loss of blood from these large veins; and order the doctor that he does not press too much, for their veins are naked, and know how to stop the flow of blood.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The ventouse that is on the back so much as to the foundation of the fundament, and to the diseases of the root, it must be big, and of iron, that it has to do well with milking; and perhaps, if it were subtle, it would break; and would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leg ventouses so much as to open, for they draw the blood from all the body, and are equivalent to the ancient pains of the rheumatism, and of the marris, and of the bladder, and cut off the flowers; and they are in the place of the II sophenes, and of the II cheville, and nevertheless they weaken the body after a long use, and bring pain in more than one situation.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put the ventouse is that you put it first empty, and suck promptly, and place it carefully, and stir evenly, and do not stop doing this until you see the red and inflamed place, and then firm up, and remove the ventouses, and take care of the dispositions of the bodies, for there are some who have painful hearts, and clear pores: so it is necessary to hurt once only, and to make large wounds, and a little bit deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if he is a heavy man, he should strike twice: once to thin the vein for the blood of the heavy man.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if he is very thin, he should strike a third time; and when we want to squeeze out the blood little by little, we must press it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to drain blood, we should do it often; and if he is fat, he should be struck perfectly, and the end is that the wound be seen suddenly, and cover himself with oil of one of these things: if it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, with watercress oil, or chervil, or chamomile, or any other thing.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is excessively cold and damp, take oil of almonds or balm or caraway seed oil and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if one has a sore to be kept soft and wide open, one should not put oil on it but instead wash it after the wound is cleaned with rosewater, cold water, water from mulberries, water from cucumbers, porcelain water, or other similar water.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if one has moisture due to sweat, if it comes out like this, or with rosewater, myrrh water, and sumac water and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And if one has excessive moisture, they should rise using old wine, or water from oak, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not good to be bathed or bathed before being warmed up, but an hour or two after; and they should not fall asleep after the warming-up, but when they need to warm themselves up, as soon as they are warmed up.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are sick with colic, and their stomach is too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that he drink cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces at the end of a basket, and similar things; and eat small fish, and cheese of the chaster, and wet meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should drink syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and small fish, and cheese of the chaster, and wet meat; and on the day when he will ventuse, he must drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men three times or muscade before the ventilation, or after, to strengthen the principal members; and soften the stomach, but it is not necessary that those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The ventilations that are put to hurt are those that are put on the liver, and on the stomach, and podagre, and on the belly and the ribs and the hunchback, because this member does not suffer to be hurt on the outsides, and it is not done except to attract blood from one member to another, as we put ventilations on the breasts when the child is not well; to take away the viscous substance that is in the member, as we put ventilations on the belly and on the ribs to thin the member; and to take away the pain, when there is an operation or a stone, if it takes away by its attractive virtue by chance the operation, or deserts the stone from its place; and thus it is done when one puts it on the liver and on the stomach when there is reținuted ventilation, and these ventilations are emptied only to suck so little; and they are never filled together fire, and never filled with plain water, as in the disease of pleurisy, and in this way one fills the ventilation with hot water or water in which he has cooked herbs fitting for that.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup is administered to fire so:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup is to be made so: two fingers wide and half a palm in circumference, and it should have a small hole at its center as if to hold an awl, and let it be of silver, smooth before so as not to hurt the patient when applied to the limb; and in the middle, a rod crossing it, of silver or iron, for a grip, and there are great and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them; because the suction cups of children are other than those of old people, and thinner than those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And it should be placed so: take the grip of wax or linen, and put it in the middle of the suction cup across the rod that is in the middle of the suction cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so as not to burn the patient; and then put it on the limb, and your two fingers are on the hole that we have said, so that when you turn it, if there is vapor, then take off the suction cup; and take the grip again as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup now which is amined in the disease of pleurisy, to all water, has no verge nor hole, and is not amined but when he is plain of water, and is put on the limb so little; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	In the suction cups now which are amined in the disease of pleurisy, to all water, have no verge nor hole, and are not amined but when they are plain of water, and are put on the limb so little; and this is the form: Suction cups are not amined but in members or one cannot put suction cups because of their smallness, as lips and gums, and similar ones; and in their nakedness of chariot, if like two or nails, and others similar; and the quality of using it so is that when you find suction cups which are in sweet water clean without danger, then take them; and put them into a nut of sweet water, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their suction cups; and then be healed by opening and suction cup, then rub the member until it is red, and put on the suction cups; and when they will be plain, and dried up, if there is one where you can put a suction cup, put it, for this is worth most after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If so, raise the joint from there, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the joint is still too far away from the heart of the veins, dip a linen towel in cold water, and put it on, as long as the veins are constricted; and if the vein multiplies, put crushed vitriol or scurvy grass, and similar things, until they are constricted; or you put half of peeled peas on the joint, and leave them there until they dry out completely, now it will stop; and if you need more, get other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the veins do not want to take hold, rub the joint with fresh blood, or you put a needle in it as long as the vein flows out of it, and then put them on, and sometimes when they feel the blood, they will dry out; and when you see that they are peeing, sprinkle a little powdered aloen and seaweeds, or ash, on them, so they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapter on fractures is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is useful for the restoration of a dislocation and the relief of pain.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, good fellow, that the wise men have poured this chapter on fractures from an ancient book, which neither letter nor book has ever revealed; and for this reason the science is strange to our land, for I never found a good one; and I know nothing except by the means of the ancient books, or I have studied them so much that I have dealt with the science and by experience, and by habit of life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have condensed it at the end, and clearly shown the shapes of the instruments that are used, as I have done in the two chapters preceding this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is fitting that we say in the prologue of this book the sums of the word and the chapters where the sage puts his understanding, and delays on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a break, dislocation, twist, or strain comes to anyone, it is fitting that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if any part of him is not very strong, as in the case of a weak back, or an encumbrance, or an old man; or if his shoes are not very comfortable, or too often; and he does not eat hot meals, or char without taste, and does not drink wine, or eat greasy foods, and does not fill himself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt about a hot spike, or an expansion of matter in the member; then bring back the sickness to its first rule which it has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	Et when the broken bone begins to heal, if it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meats that are thickly cooked, or have viscosity like flour cooked in water, and rice, and beans, and peas, and eggs of fowls, and fish, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a thin nutriment retards healing and the fracture more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot well heal or mend the members together by their nature because of the dryness of the members, nor those that are too soft, as children's bones; but to join the bone together with thick meat, which hardens it, so that it becomes strong as before; and do not at all interrupt the work, and because it is necessary to feed it with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break at the head is different from the break at the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes around, and another that comes from grinding, as the blade of a pen to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a break with a wound, and a break that is all a little crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And to each manner there is its own tool in the restoration, according to that which the memory comes in its place; and it is known the break of the bone by that which its turn is twisted, and opened well from the side, and some to the pressure of the hand; and when there is no torsionality or bend, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no break; but it may well have torsionality, or a fracture, or a little break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you cannot move it by hand alone, then put on drugs that come later, and then restrain it now with great care.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that came in spring, and there are two parts separated, now you must put them together evenly, so that the chiules come out and the cuts heal; and when the cuts heal, if you leave it for a day, as long as the cuts are healed; then put them together with ease and care, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then restrain it.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, and the two parts are separated, whether it is hand or foot, or a small member, or two strings, or one string and your hand; put the member back according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are healed, you take away the additions in their places by the drug that you can, and keep so that by your work no pain or injury comes to the patient; and join well the two pieces of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And test it well with your hand if you think it is not good: if the joint is well done and not too tight, do not press as those who do so bring about heat and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in place, instruct the patient that he not move it, watching or sleeping, turning or in any other way; and take care that the member be so secure that he feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, unless it is in place, and the disposition that he does not feel any pain; and make sure that it is put correctly, so that there is no twists when he is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I know that broken members are different in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Car il y a petits membres, si comme bras et doigt et semblant: si convient envelopper draps de lin mollet et souples; et ceux qui sont gros, si comme cuisse et jambe: si convient envelopper d'un lien large et dur, car les liens larges embrassent tout le grand membre, et l'entraînent de toutes parts uniformément, sans qu'il y ait aucune trache; puis, avec une main, enroule légèrement trois tours ou quatre selon la longueur du membre, et attache la fin du lien, puis va au-dessus de la rupture et l'attire moins, que la rupture s'éloigne un peu la rupture; et assouplisse le lien peu à peu, jusqu'à ce que tu aies pris une grande partie de la place saine, puis reprends un autre lien, et retourne d'abord très près sur la place brisée; puis retourne à la partie en saillie de la rupture, et l'attire doucement, pas trop fort ni pas trop mollement, comme nous l'avons dit au premier lien ci-dessus; puis met entre les liens enveloppés de lin ou de draps, tant qu'ils soient tous égaux, puis attache tout par-dessus le bandeau, et puis met tes étals bien faits, s'il n'y a pas d'abscesses ou d'engorgements.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or an abscess, put a hot, soothing thing over it, and let the abscess be drawn up in this way for some days; then draw out on your fingers, and let them be half of a broad piece of leather that is wet with blood, or of a stump from which one makes cleats, or of palm branches, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And the stake that a man puts over the break should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and let it be as far away from the member as necessary, small or large; then draw on the stakes just as you did in the first lieure, and tie a thread thereon, as you did in the first lieure; tighter is better, but not too tight; and it should be made of soft linen; for if the thread is thick, like those the foolish ones make their lieures with string that is twisted, this is a great mistake, for the lieure cannot be equal if it is too tight, and it should only be half an inch less than two inches of space between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pregnant and the umbilical cord is torn during birth, then it should be wrapped in linen or another clean cloth so that it does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the break, and the bandage is torn, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to extract stars from all the broken limbs the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not good to put stars on them before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess, hot sometimes; and here is the way of the ancient plasters for restoring fracture, dislocation, and torsion: and this is that you take flour so it sticks to the sides of the mill, and confound it with plenty of egg, and put this preparation, not too thin or too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the plaster which restores the fracture in many situations, and most importantly for women and small children, because there is neither too much heat nor too much cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Other methods of plastering: take honey and aniseed and fennel and asafetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, 3; mirr and aloe, 5; alchemiet, 8; and, if it is ground up, mix it with egg white. The compound made from the body’s own blood is hot; therefore, when this plastering is used, because it has a good composition, it quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Other methods of plastering, which are useful for twists: take mugwort and beeswax, 10; mirr and aloe, 18; acacia, 6; and Armeria, 10, grind them well, and mix with egg white or egg yolk, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Other methods of plastering for joints and bones out of place, which soothes pain gradually, and is useful for fractured bones: take linseed, and soak it in water, and then mix it with cooked oil, and apply it to the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cists do not ease the pain but are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly healing bones.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of applying an ointment that heals broken bones: take dried leaves of the fig tree and ground them together with leaves of the plant known as "pavement" and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of applying an ointment to heal broken bones and also to ease the pain remaining from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetchlings, of each a part; and grind them together with wine, and the member is warmed, apply it with the water of coriander, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of applying an ointment which is more effective than the first, to be used when the abscess is long-standing before restoring the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of mallow, and of flax seed, of buckthorn, and of mealy-seed, and of violets and of chamomile, each one part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras states that one should not put anything on a broken limb except for a wax and oil ointment, and nothing else; he adds that it should not be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to me that Galen states that one should put on a broken limb dry things that are a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe, and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to make plasters that serve for pain and injury: take wool and hair of a sheep, or feathers of an owl, and mallow, and hemp, and spin them evenly, and grind them into a plaster, and apply it to the flesh.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then let it rest a little while, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does his bone move out of place; if pain comes, or itching, or there is no rest or swelling, then hurry up and let it go, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sea sponge moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the member, until the itching ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry one, wet with water or oil, and tie it on with a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm; and ease the inflammation of the member, and relieve the pain, then begin to apply the poultice again, and a little of the plaster, and do not strip it off as hard as before; and carefully until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess, redness, pain, and swelling have all gone away, and that you need to put plaster and bind it up again, do so as you did at first, in an even manner.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the member does not move at all of what we have said, and you do not remove the splint from it again until after three, four, five, or seven days; and do not let it stay more than twenty days, according to what is seen, while the bruise becomes smaller, and the support of the arm approaches the shoulder; then strengthen the member more than before, and make its meat fat, as I said above; and if you see that the member dries up more than necessary, then dip it in warm water every time you remove the splint, let it dry for a day, and then remove the splint again; by this work, then, control the swelling of the member, and destroy carefully what is wrong with it, that restore the member correctly: it is bad, and if it is very painful and frightening, and I do not see anything else but to let go and to work correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are various ways of breaking, and they have different appearances, and the causes are diverse; for there is a break that is done by impact of an axe, and all the bone is shattered from its socket, so as to make it like an apple or a nut; and for this reason this way of breaking is called "shattering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the axe shatters the bone from above without piercing it, and this way of breaking is called "absolute"; and there is a wound of either large or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	Or if there is impact from within, or a crack, or a break of the collarbone from stone, or falling upon stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing break that approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if a wound that has entered the bone is as thin as a hair, and for this reason it is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by hitting a stone, or by falling, or by a similar thing, and so a piece of bone enters; and if the head of the bone is shaped like that which the blacksmith makes when he works on the bellows; if it goes into the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if there is more moisture under the skin where the bone has its head, as the head of a child; and all these ways of fracture in which small pieces are broken as in an apple; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of fractures by traction on them, and investigation to find out, and by the corrumped cart which is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is caused by what happens when one discovers bone, and one rubs it from above, thus opening the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the cure for the fracture, be cautious of the accidents that may happen to the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of sense, ekstasis, palpitations, feverish ague, and if the hairs grow forth and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal properly without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any threatening accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the naviculation comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone by the 14th day at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then you must hasten to remove the bone by the 7th day, so that the tissue around the bone may rot, and the accident we have spoken of may come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture comes only to the membrane that covers the skull, then you must split the severed part from there; and it is that you press on the head of the patient with your hand, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and over the shape of the wound more gently than you can, and when the blood comes out at the uncovering of the bone, or at the incising of an abscess, help him with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the space with wet drape wetted with oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and be sure about the coming of blood; then begin to separate the bone, and this is done according to II ways of work: one way is that you take it by the narrow end in front, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then, with water, pour a little more than what you did before.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that if you have several different lengths of threads, some are short and others are long, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and carefully work, so that you do not hurt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	If the bone is out and hard, it is necessary that you pierce it inside, so that you place threads with nails, not completely so as not to pierce the bone at the tip, and must have above the tip a margin or a circle, so that it does not pass beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each one comes in its place of the edge of the bone, so that you have nails for all test; and this is the form of the three ways of threading:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce inside the bone is that you put the thread on the bone, and turn it twice as much as you think the bone is pierced; then put the thread elsewhere a little apart, and so do all around, then cut off the space of the bone that is between the pits, and make it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or any of the tools that you have there like pliers, pincers; and be careful not to touch the skull nor the syfac.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if it is believed that you remove the ardor which is retained in the bone by all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more tender and thinner than the other incisor; and if it does not retain any small bones or scales, if the bone is lightly placed on the instruments; then cure the wound with tar and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of opening is that which Galen says, which is more dangerous; and the cut is very deep, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break has opened; and then, when you have uncovered this part, place the end of this lens-shaped incisor there, from which it gets its shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and is the side water in two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then proud of a small hammer on it, so that you lightly beat the bone all around, and you give yourself well to guard the tendon that is desoz; if she is stuck to the bone, then the legierement the bone, for on the bone well hurts harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce only to the tendon, and the bone is cut so little above, and there are small pieces, then cover over this asperity, and remove the scales with a sharp razor of which you must have various quantities, to administer in each one the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are before too many razors, and after more subtle ones, and do not stop doing this as long as it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair cuts and delicate shavings, you should bring forth reason according to his treatment; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered to those who have placed their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is exposed, then you should bring forth a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in oil, and place it on the wound; then take another cloth, double, double, or triple, and soak it in wine and oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do so more lightly than you can, so that you do not aggravate the wound, then tie it up again, and do not remove it until the abscesses have calmed down a little; and then take off, and apply medicines as roots of plants, flour of dates, incense powder, and similar things; and of these things make a powder, and place it on the wound, and administer it with medicines that cannot be tasted; and guard against the wound being dirty, so you do not leave it oozing, or let it gather dirt, because when bowels gather on the cloth under the skull, if they corrode and stick to them, they bring great harm upon the sick person; for when something is applied to the wound that stings, if it is taken away quickly.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Prend garde donc, que nul mauvais accident arrive au malade, si comme nous avons dit, s'il est douteux sans doute.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Take heed then, that no bad accident comes to the patient, if as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt. And if black bile comes only because of the medicine put there, which has its virtue, then you should squeeze a part of honey and three parts of rosewater and mix one drapelet with it, and apply it to the sick one; then cure in the ways that seem good to you until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two bones above are never broken if one falls on them by accident, for they are like bone; and this bone does not break unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then you should drive your little finger or pertus of the neck into it, and make it even inside the index finger and at the heel by turning, until the neck regains its natural form; and do this lightly, and take care that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if his break is in the upper part of the neck, and he cannot come to his place, then you should put it equal to the head of a small ray.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if his break is in two parts, then do otherwise, and hurry to restore the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess is calm, then bind at the neck with strips of linen cloth if his break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another from the other side, if his break is; and let the strips be so thick that they fill the apertures of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that one should moisten the strips daily.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It seems to me that it is not good, but it is necessary that the strips be moistened in sheep's fat and powder of millet; then leave the bandage, until the bone is hard and the joints dury.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never stuff feathers in tents, and if it is not well covered, the wind blows through it and hurts the patient, or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscess breaks while you are operating, put cotton wadding soaked in oil or a little piece of gauze.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess does not burst while you are operating, apply paste to the outside, made from flour and powder of salsify, mixed with honey and oil, then put a light bandage on it, and do not tie it tight; and if the rupture of the abscess is small, and it breaks into little pieces, extract them with suitable instruments, then cut off the break, and cure the injuries that come with it, and apply pastes and oils appropriate to it; and if there is no injury inside the abscess, cure the tent and put wadding made from cotton in oil.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very great, and it is not broken in two, but only cracked a little within, then let it be known slightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side of the jaw, then insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, then insert your index finger of the left hand into it, and push the break in slightly, and fix it with the other hand to one side, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is in two places, then it is necessary that you make an extension of the two parts, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth has occurred or the break, then take out a string of gold, silver, or silk, and place it on top of the broken jaw, and place over it a double cloth; and place over the cloth a long and wide piece of leather made even according to the shape of the jaw, and fasten it with nails that you can use, and command the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, if you let it rest on the third day, and then put back what has been changed; and apply plaster to it, of the powder from the mill with much ash or flour from the barley meal, after you have taken off the cerote; and apply to it a lighter plaster, and if the plaster applies itself, and the disposition of the sick does not change, let it be until he is well; many times he is well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses come forth, if you administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not take any piece of bone out; if the osteoporosis is subtle, use tools suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, broaden it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, put on it a plaster that suits this, to dry up, until it is healed.
de la forcele	and with force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	and with force he breaks several times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three ways: or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a break with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the repairs are so when the break is without injury, that you have two ministers, so that one washes the shoulder that is broken with force; and the others stretch the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is no appearance or tangling.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you are to extend your skill further, then cover the shoulder of the patient with a round pole of fabric or another material, and make it as large as your need requires; and put pressure on it, and hold the pole in your hand, so that you set back the break evenly, just as is right.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you are unable to pull the head of the shoulder away from the back, so that it comes out perfectly, then the patient should lie down on his back, and have the shoulder raised a little, and the assistant pulls the shoulder towards the ear, and presses the shoulder bone down, until the bone comes out.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break at your sides, and if you find it difficult to split it, then split it with your tool; but hold the pole away from the instrument for safety.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and appears like a spoon, and is not a hair, and it is also as wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and it has II shoulders, if you see it, and one is wide and the other is narrow, just as is the rupture of the wound that you have made when you fractured the bone; and when you are sure of the apoplexy being hot, if the wound is great, and the rupture is small, or if you doubt about the apoplexy being hot, then employ the wound with linen and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot apoplexes come, so soak them in oil, rosewater, and wine, and put on them.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if hot apoplexes come, so soak them in oil, rosewater, and wine, and put on them. For the extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no fracture, it is that you put on the bone the plaster of the mill powder and the ash of uff, and put light splints on, and put a spine around it if you need it; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then put the drape double splints on, and plaster it; then take an extremely thin staff three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the chief of the bandage hangs down; and put the staff on the fracture, and turn the bandage back on the neck, and extract the staff with care; and return to each part, and when you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place, and you see clearly that the staff does not move on the bone, so let it rest for a day or two, and when the bonds loosen, if they hold, and the restraint is removed, and make the sick man walk on his heels with care, and put a small splint on him behind the shoulder, in order to raise the dislocation; since the fracture of the clavicle is held by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and let it not be loosened except if there is a bad accident, until about 20 days; then begin to plaster again, if you see that it is needed, and extract it and leave it like this, until it is healed; and it is healed in 28 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone comes forward, and does not pull out the nail, then fix it in place, and the bone, and do as we said in the dislocation of the shoulder to relieve an abscess with hot water.
de la brisure dou pis	from a break of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The feet are never broken in mid-air, but this sometimes happens; but they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when they are broken in mid-air, if they fall on their sides, and feel great pain, and lack support, and sometimes vomit blood, and the bone is broken, and it hurts a lot.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lie down on his back, and you put a cloth between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and carefully put it together in all ways as much as possible so that the figure of the bone is like this; then put him in a plaster and wrap it around with a thin fabric, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the bandage around the back smoothly, and tighten it, and untie it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if he needs to be loosened because of corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, do it quickly, and loosen him, and remove the plaster, and treat it in a way that is fitting; then remove the plaster, and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rupture of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the rib-breaker does not come from the outside but from within, from deep within the back, and it does not bend much because they are rigid; and it hurts very much to the inquiry.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restore them so that you make the rupture even, as is appropriate.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put on plaster and tie it with a strap, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib-break is facing inward, the patient feels great pain and crying, as if they were weeping, because the bone hurts; and he vomits a lot of blood, and it is a sign of illness, and there was great discomfort in the old days.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if one of those who serve does not administer meat that swells the belly, to push the break out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We don't make this, unless warm blood comes out, if it doesn't come out.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, let the wound be cleaned.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And no one should put vents on the spot to draw out the form, and this seems reasonable to me; however, there is doubt that the vents do not attract the excesses to the spot for the purpose of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And no one should cover the spot with another wet cloth in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the place even, then it is cured with the cure for boils, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because of the bone that hits the tent, and there is doubt about the patient, then it is necessary to split the bone in two places at the broken rib, and put on the syringe with medicine; and then the bones should be trimmed, and pulled lightly, and then sewed the two ends of the wound, if it is big, and treated with poultices until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess comes up, if you dip it in oil and put it on your back; and while waiting for the oil of what needs to be an abscess, and make a good bandage at the cost where it is, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break from the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Once comes the breaker of the bones of the neck, and that he plows; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has come to anyone, and you can see if he will be healed or not, if you notice that his hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you pinch them with a needle, if they don't hurt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many situations, and if he does not hurt and feels well when he is pulled and does not feel anything, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if you put the cure on him.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the back of the neck, and you can tell whether it is healthy or not, take note if the muscles are soft, and consider the accident that happened and the pain and discomfort in the hand, and when it is revived on its stomach, if there is pain without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is revived on its back and it tries to move, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is fatal: do not try to work on it in treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come from somewhere, then this is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is this: if there is an abscess, put oil or linseed oil on it until it is calm; then put on one of the plasters and cover it with a bandage, and tie it up, and command the patient to rest; and do not lie down in that part where he feels pain until he is better.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Et si certains os sont désarticulés, couvrez-les avec du goudron; then oste l'os, puis assemblez les deux lèvres de la plaie, s'elle est grande, avec une couture, puis appliquez le cataplasme en utilisant du charbon, jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri; et si li chiés de l'os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», si fent un creux dans ton pouchet avec ta main senestre, et le met igal a l'autre main a ton pooir, puis met l'emplaastre et l'estele sus, s'il en as mestier; then l'estraint, and if there are desevreit os, fent-les puis curez la plaie tant qu'elle soit sanee.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	For the break in the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the hip joint becomes dislocated, and if it does, there would be a little loss of movement in the head; and let it lengthen, and decline towards the back, and bring pain to the patient in that place, and a swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know what is the break and its shape; and if the break is at the top, make it even as much as possible until it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or if it declines inward, make the patient stand on his stomach as much as the restoration of that break allows him to.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you put the plaster on, then put a wooden or cork splint on top of it, and tighten the break so that it does not move; and fix the position of the bones as much as possible.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his back or side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess bursts, if it is not infected, as long as the abscess burst has healed, and put on what we have said above; then return to healing, and hold it like that, unless there is any accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	the shoulder is what is between the collar and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of the two ways: one is that you take a strong piece of wood, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay down two stakes of wood, and tie the patient to them, then hang him up by one leg; then let him fall onto the wood, until he reaches the ground, and have a strong piece of wood ready, then tie the broken arm to it, so that the patient hangs by his arms; then make sure that the broken arm does not move.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	Et l'autre manière si est que on souvine le malade sur son haireil, et li lie la main à son col, puis commande à II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure à ses mains, et li autres teigne desoez à tout I liien, et étend desoz chescuns à sa partie.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is too strong, then remove the chain from the break, and on the break, and extend each of the ministers to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the shoulder's head, then you should put the chain gently from the assembly, and on the other side of the break; and if the break is on one side of the collar, then you should put the chain lightly, without effort, as long as the break is even on its place, and on its side; then put the break even, if it is to come, and hold it, so that the abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if an abscess comes out, do not extract it until seven days have passed; and put a wet cloth on it with rosewater, until the abscess is calm; then extract it, and the way to extract it is that you put the plaster on the broken part, and then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the loins; and wrap it up, and extract it by the shoulder and by the arm, so that the arm stays in its place, if nothing hurts it or if the bone does not break.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone moves, then use a splint, and put a larger and stronger splint on the broken part than the others, and leave two inches of space between each splint, and let each splint be so big that it goes over the break by three inches on either side; then extract it with the splints, as I said at the beginning about the plaster on the break, more firmly and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the setting of the stars, and the extraction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incision warm, let it be tied up until the seventh day, as we have said; then observe each three days whether there is a pain or not; do not allow the swelling to come into place, or the healing will not come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If you doubt, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident happens, and he does not loosen it than after three days or more, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and fasten the shoulder with one piece of linen evenly, and observe every hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the ties; if it heals with the power of medicine, and gives him food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at the first layer; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is fitting that the shoulder and leg should be put back in place after 40 days of all; and then one should untie it and administer to it bath and medicines of ointments to apply.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is ugly and blocked, if it does not separate in one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosciles," one small, and that one is the elbow; and the other large, and that is the shoulder, towards the small one; perhaps a fracture of the large foscile alone, or of the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the restoration is easy, and the recovery; and when the large one is broken, the recovery is bad, and more painful than when it is broken both together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If this little fowl is just slightly bruised, then it is necessary to lightly stretch it out, and place it in a straight position.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If the large fowl is injured, then it must be pulled out more forcefully; and extend it on one knee, and raise the leg with your hand higher than the other two legs, and the small fowl lower than the others, and so that the patient lies across it in the middle, and one foot before him higher than the other, so that the patient suffers no effort; then extend the other legs with your arms to the wounded part at their side, or at their feet, and another minister on the other foot above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then he should be made equal, according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there are broken pieces, then each one should be put in its place; and if any of them have come loose and cannot be held in place, then you should fix it with a pin or nail, as we have said above.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the cautery there is an injury, I have spoken to it in the singular chapter of the ointment; if he takes the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration there are abscesses, I will cover them with a paste made of oil and white wax that is not too hard or too soft; and I will cover them from above gently, until the abscesses are calmed down.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then cover the bone with the paste, and I will put the ointment of the miller's powder with a lot of ink, because I will put the splints, and let the splint of the injury be higher by a hand and more wide than the others; and know that there should be VI splints or arms in several positions: whether the injury is in one bone or in II; and stretch it further up than anywhere else, all the time less pulling away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the ointment; and may the drapes that are on the injury be soft and moist, and not too hard or sharp; and let the thread from which it is stretched be made of linen, nor too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And rest the member and the lien for a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then it is convenient that you dip the member in hot water, until the itch is calmed; and let the member not rest too tight.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then start the extraction again, and if the liens are softened and the bones deviated, and similar things, then address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one is not warned that the member cannot be reset, because it is too tight, then it is convenient that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for a few days, until the swelling goes down, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient, then do not remove the bandage until XX days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	At the end of the first sentence: "And so he keeps his hands at his throat, and makes his neck even, and wards off movement and turning over, and sleeps on his back; and know that this breaker is healed in 30 days or in 35, and perhaps in 20, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	is that at the back of the hand and to us on both sides there are few breaks, and comes only that it bleeds many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bleeds, it is necessary that the patient cross his fingers and sit straight evenly; then he lays his hand on the extended cloth, and extends the broken bones, and makes them even, as long as they are well joined; and he puts the plaster and the poultices, if an abscess comes, then he puts a patch according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in a sheet of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks within the garden of the plant between the loins, so make a flagpole, and command the sick that he strangle to his broken plant; and then draw out with a long curtain, and make its steele of great air as well as the plant of the hand, and draw.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks on the back, so that you put a steele on, and another desos in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and tie the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to one of the two, it is a pouch, so make it even, as it is right; and hold it with the plant, and if you see that there is no movement, then put a small straight steele to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is in the other two, as in the index or one of them, make it even, and bind it with the healthy hand that comes after; or you bind all three together, holding them so they don't move, or you put a steele on it, as though you were poking; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the aposteme, and help those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the breast wound
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The chest bone is often bruised, and one can clearly see it when it turns forward and backward; and the healing process is good if we wrap it tightly with a bandage, and another above it.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister his bandage equally to his part; and it is when the fracture has entered the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is near the root of the breast, let one minister's bandage go forward to the fist, and another's go backward from the wound.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the kneecap, and then let one minister' bandage go forward to the knee, and another' s go backward from the wound; and then put the master at equal levels with his two hands until it is in its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and wrap him up, so that no cut comes to him.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that has become hot, let it calm down again and then return to your work and your treatment; the time is appropriate in this way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess that has become hot, let it calm down again and then return to your work and your treatment; the time is appropriate in this way.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if it falls, and turns this way or that way, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold on, then one should take care; and if one cannot, then one should split the place, and pull it out hard; and heal it as we have said, until it is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And in no case should the surgeon use a knife there, as we have said for the shoulder and arm; however, when restoring it in this way does not improve the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the chest is restored in a day or less or more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	And know that in the knee joint there is little rupture, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, except for a split or a gap, and comes to all the pain, and without pain, and this feels good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing process is so that one who is bent on both sides is made straight again as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and put a round bandage on it if you need to, and hold it in place as it should be held, and then follow all the measures we have spoken of in other chapters, such as a hot blister and others that are similar; then apply to each accident whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	About the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	We know that in the leg there are two bones, one which is called by right "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and it happens with the breaking of the leg just as with the arm, and for this reason the healing process is the same; and if the two bones are broken together, the leg turns on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his thin nose is broken, then turn away from it.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, then one feels great pain and can see it well; and turn aside.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And then make an extension, and make it even, and bind the joints evenly; however, the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and align it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two long pieces of wood that will overlap the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the knee to the heel; then wrap them over it two by two on top and below, and bind it tightly in the middle, and at this binding no leg should hang down to the right or left, and so is good; and no one administer I darts of the long leg, and if it is, put the leg in order not to move, and properly do that in the break where there is a wound; and stir every day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; then heal as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no break at all, but from the bones of the foot comes a break only sometimes and in two ways, and has never been seen except in many cases.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, so that if he wants to walk, then now put your foot on his own, let the bones come up, then press them together until they get back into their places; then apply plaster to it and wrap it up, and place a small table of II flat pieces in front of the foot, then fasten it to the foot with a rope, and then take the drapelz you have laid out, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	When three days or four have passed, if the leg is still swollen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, if you restore them, as we said to the two of the hand; then put on the broken one a stone according to its length from the two, and let it be a little more wide, then place below the stone that I have said, and strain going forward; and if there are II or III, or more, broken, then put on each one a stone according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strain the stone below the stone; and let them remain on top of the head of the stone far from the belly of the stone, so that it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said for the others breakers, since we have said it; and heal each accident as it is needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaker of the bone of the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When a woman's nature is broken, if she is set upright enlarged, then lean her to the back part of the loins and be held from behind; then fill the nature with cotton of the sickness, and put in it as big as I stand; then take off the woman, and lightly touch her loins little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of nature, and brings back the bones with a stand; and when she wants to urinate, if she jumps the cotton, and when she has urinated, let her return, and in this way do seven days or more: then will be restored the break, and she will die, take a bladder of sheep, and tie a cord around the neck, and pour all the bladder into nature; then blow into the bladder making a form, until the bladder is inside: nature will return the break; then be filled with cotton, and let it stand for some days, until it is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the jaw of man or woman is broken, if it be set back as we have said in the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and use thereon, and hears my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means many things right way to restore it: hear then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the neck, when it is broken, take a goose's beak and bottle it up; then wrap it in a cloth, and leave it three days or more, and he will be healed without hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is good for the fracture with wound, even if it is great, as the hip bone or shoulder blade or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healers that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, and you do not have any other remedy, then begin to restore the broken one in that same hour or day when the blisters come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the blisters come out, and you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calm, and you don't touch them neither on the third nor on the fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the outside of the knee cap, it is necessary that you put it into position gently with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal to your hands, put them into position with an iron instrument, which has seven or eight inches in length, and whose width corresponds to the quantity of the wound; and for this purpose it is necessary that one should use three or four, according to what is needed in each cure of a broken limb; and they should be round and a little thick, so as not to press on the member by your work, and be sharp at the front and thick in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called "pallanche," for it is necessary that the bent shoulder be placed on the top of the head of the visible bone; and is set once, until he recovers, and is even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, it is necessary that you chop the head of the bone, until the instrument has the ability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an appropriate instrument, either an incision or a saw, at your power; then make those who are delayed in the bone with roughness and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its place, then dip the drape in black wine vinegar and clean it properly; and do not put on top of the wound wax or any other oil where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption; then administer leeches when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and give yourself well in guard that the wound is not tightened with the fracture; and many times such a thing has happened, and has brought about the death or corruption of the patient on one occasion; and the instrument is softer and less acute than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will not come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not good to put it on splints; but wrap hard drapes around it instead of splints, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that bow is going into the wound, if you have put anything on it yet, and you make a clean break with four-fold bandaging and similar things;
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	Then you must disconnect the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and restored.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be taken apart in such a way that the bow does not run down quickly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if one day passes, and he cannot keep the limb apart but lets it run together again, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, you must make a clean break with bandages, and remove all these troublesome pieces which bring about pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to light, or some other form of corruption, then you must cure it according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if the bone is broken and opened on the limb, as with the hip or shoulder bone, and other large bones, then do not pull it out, for many die when this is done, but rather let it rot; perhaps after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of wounds that come from the outside
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Come often do we see after the health of the broken bone, especially when it is near a joint, and what an ugly thing it is to see the limb's shape; and perhaps cannot make the limbs move naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care, therefore, that we are not ill: if the administrator prescribes medicines that are stinking, such as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sacrum collybum, so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that is stinking, or with a lot of egg white, or with oil; and put them on the knot in heaps, and bind it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then loose it, and start another one, until the knottedness is bone; or you press it onto a piece of cloth that is well made; for the property of the cloth is that it takes away all swelling from the limbs; and if the knottedness has turned into hardness like stone, it must be cut off, if the excess is taken off, and the apparent surplus is removed; or you take it to any barber, until it is bone, and cure it as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb which is weak after confinement
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break in the bone has healed, and there remains after weak and delicate members, for several reasons: for one, because he was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because he had too many strings, and could not get the right tension on the member; or because of numerous scrapes; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make his body soft, until his blood increases in him; and give him baths, and provide pleasure and rest; then put ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts the great amount of circulation, and dampen it often with warm water, until the circulation corrects the member's shape; and return it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the two broken limbs after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that the member should be broken anew, for many foolish people have done this in our land; but such practices are blamed, and they bring great harm and even death. Nevertheless, if the joints and torments are fresh, it is good that they be soaked in warm water or soft herbs are cooked, as leaves of eels, roots, melilot, and similar things; and the salve made with a gentle balm, such as well-made hydrastis, and you take the musk of eels, and confound it with lard of swans or oil of sesame, and make the plaster; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of coles, and similar medicines that soften the torment.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the bone moved by constant and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And keep the limb moving every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the limb is twisted and stiffened, as in the case of a stone, then it must be opened with a sharp blade lightly; and put poultice and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back by gentle movement.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, and the leaks increase, and by chance he is reset to his place; because then it cannot be moved at all: many times it brings about spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this will come, if you make the patient well, then let him rest, until the abscesses are quietened; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then move it lightly, and cure each limb as the pain comes; then treat it.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the treatments for dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the wrist.
des mandibules	the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And then the mandibles are dislocated and they are two ways: either they are a little out of place and a little soft; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chest, and the saliva of the mouth goes down, and he cannot keep his mouth closed, and enwraps his tongue with words.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return it to its place with multiple positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, then you must quickly bring it to the hospital, and do not wait; and in this way that the minister holding the head of the sick person, pours a little medicine from one of his hands at the root of the mandibular dislocation inside the mouth, the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands are far away, to make it equal; and order the patient that he softens his mandibles, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the wound be equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And let it be brought back with the greatest care, especially if both jaws are involved, by using hot water and oil, gently at first; do not delay in bringing it back as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they have been brought back with equal care, and the mouth of the sick person closes easily with a softener, place it on a pad soaked in oil and wax made from olive oil and wax, then leave it there lightly; let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows, so that he does not move or try to improve his position, but eat a little and drink a little, until the pain is relieved, and the jaw is well set.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour and do not return to their places, then fever and usual heat come, and by chance there is a solution of the abdomen, and by chance it vomits pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see that, then you know that it is a loss; and many die within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	of the jaw does not dislocate from within its extension on the side of the face and is dislocated only once to the outside, and it can be felt well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back and extends his arms; and then press on the form with your palm, and it will return; then put the plaster and bandage on, and hold it in place; and the jaw that is next to the face cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated once, let it return to its place as we have said; then put the plaster and bandage on, and hold it in place, and order the patient to rest until he is well; and thus also is the shoulder joint returned when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	I understand that the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: either it comes out at the edge of the shoulder blade; or at the top of the arm pit; perhaps it comes out at the back of the shoulder, and this is hard to treat; it also comes out towards the bottom of the armpit, although this is harder to notice, and there are often no signs that something is wrong. For those who have a lot of pain in their shoulders, they should go to hospital; for those with moderate pain, treatment is not necessary, and they will feel better on their own.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	Sometimes, after a fall or blow to the shoulder, the shoulder joint becomes stiff and painful; it is then that the dislocation becomes apparent.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is therefore necessary for you to test this, as long as you are certain of it; and then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	Et est conue li dislocations quan il est aval vers l'assele, et met difference entre l'espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l'espaule une fosse, et desoz l'assele au tochier le chief de l'espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s'elle est desaleeee en haut, si n'est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n'est mie fors a ramener, quan elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister will place the sick hand up high, then put on the splint, and force the joint back into place high up; and the minister will place the hand, and extend it high up, so that it comes out; then come to the hospital quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said before, in a few days, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and soft and soothing infusions are prepared, as an infusion of wormwood and fenugrec and melilot in water, and they are given to him; then the patient is placed on his back, and the shoulder is dislocated a little with a smooth lever, not too soft nor too hard, then the doctor strikes the patient's heel against the lever, and gently raises the shoulder, and the doctor's hand pulls down the patient's arm; and other ministers dye the patient's shoulder, so that it does not move; this shoulder returns immediately, and if you do this according to this method: it is necessary that a man be present who is greater than the patient; and he is positioned on his left side, and the doctor raises the shoulder with a lever that is dislocated from the chair of the patient, and lifts the lever so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the patient's hand down towards his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, then without anything heavy with him, the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if he is very weak, then without anything heavy with him, the dislocation comes back now. And this is how it is done: and if a long stake is driven into the earth, whose tip is also like a pistol, and not too thick or too thin; then let the dislocated person lie on his back with his feet together, but so that he has a drape underneath him, and his hand is extended upwards from the other side, making a joint, and the joint will return to its place securely; and if it does not come back because of all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stake of the two arms long and three hands wide, which has the tip pointed so that it can enter perfectly under the axletree, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then let him lie on the long table, that he might not be hurt by the fire, then place him on the table's shoulder; and extend his arms over the table, and place the shoulder under his armpit, then put his arm on a block of wood in front of him, and let his hands hang down, and let his body swing freely: the joint has now been set.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is set, in whatever way, place under the shoulder a bunch of equal wool, then put on the plaster with powder from the mill, with incense and myrrh, all over the shoulder and around, then pull the shoulder forward, and tie it to the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck a little, as long as the limbs are comfortable, because he will heal faster; and then suck more after 5 or 7 days, and move them; and if they are firm and have not become softened, then they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of its place due to moisture or some other cause, you must apply the fire cauterization to three parts, as it is done with the章 章 章 章 章 章
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it slides after 7 days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or softened; and know that the joint has never returned to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is toward the loins and breasts, or behind, is made by an impulse and extension of the hands, and another place is administered; and he is cured as long as he is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing the member comes to be gray, and slowly moving, so use the patient many times, until that greyness is healed, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the neck
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	I know that the joint of the neck is dislocated to the ends, and returns to the ends; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not returned, for we can see and feel it well; and dislocate according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick neck with the sound one, if you can see it open.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is chopped off, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in the same way as the abscesses come out, for if the abscesses come out, if it were to be set back, it would be grief; and perhaps can not be reset from all sides, most especially when it is behind; so much less than the other dislocations, and it is of great pain, and by chance comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is so, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands are in contact with the wrist according to the cuff, from behind and from the front, and push the joint into the palm roots together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if dislocation is in front, so return when it doubles its hand to its hand, and firm at the root of the palm the cuff that has come off.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, so administer a strong extension; and it is that the two ministers extend the arm, and tint them together, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see joined the joint to the hand, if you oil it with any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in place, put it on plaster dry with auburn of egg, and strain it together, and tie the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, and then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then let it be; and if you see that the joint is not well set, then begin to plaster and bind it, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the re-alignment of the joint, and it moves, then let him bathe and gently rub, and press until it is relieved; or you put on the joint a layer of fat sheepskin, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter or bathe; and when he sweats, let him gently rub the joint, then put the skin back on, and then enter or bathe; and do this II times or III, until he is well; and if you see it, then put on the joint a layer of hot fat with butter, and apply it; so it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand should be restored quickly, more so than with other joints However, it is necessary to restore it to its place gently in the middle of the dislocation, so that the joint is swollen or there is heat.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you restore it, so that the sick hand is placed on a table, and extends its members, and makes it equal, so that its palm is placed on the joint face, and puts it back until it comes back However, it is necessary to check whether it is in place; then put the patient's back of the hand on a table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then put the patient' s back of the hand on a table, and make it equal to the face of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; but if it does not, and the extraction of the spittle-like abscesses calms her, then let it be left as it is.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then let the joint twist; and do not use any force on the patient except to extract anything by fire: therefore know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; otherwise, except for extracting by fire, there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put it on the spittle-like abscess that we have mentioned; then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then remove it again and leave it alone.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, if the moist heat of water is applied, and it is rubbed until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	De the dislocation of the two fingers of the hand: Never is one finger dislocated from one side to the other on the back of the palm or the abdomen; then are they joined again, and push down the joint of the two fingers as far as it comes back up, and then hold down the head of the two fingers, and turn it towards the part where it is joined; and leave it there for a day, and then put it right that day; and let it rest, so that the finger does not move, and do this often, as long as it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated from the bottom of the hand, and do this as you have just done, as long as it is healthy; and do the same, if it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation at the back of the neck
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder is dislocated, or several are dislocated, there is no cure, because death quickly comes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excision has been done without willingness, it cannot be held, and many times a limb is weakened, or the II legs or the II arms or I And many times the shoulder moves in IV directions; this which moves at the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you reward if the gilbositez comes from childhood: if there is no cure nor healing of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting or striking or similar things, the ancient manners of cures said by great words, but there was no great benefit in them; but I have simplified it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the swelling that comes to the foot before, there is no remedy nor cure except what comes from behind; and also that which comes straight on both sides, and cannot be cured but only that which comes from behind properly, as I said; and it is that the sick person should be stretched out on his face in an even place, and have someone strain on him so he does not burn himself, then put a stick to the head in the ground shaped, and another at the feet, and tie a ribbon around the legs of the sick person, and another at the ankles, and two ministers know the ribbons, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two sticks; and let them be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the minister put his palms on the spine shaped, until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if she does not come back by this cure, then take a barrel of three arms long, and shave off the wall, and let the sick person be on one side, and pour the head of the barrel from the wall, then put the middle of the barrel on the spine; and put the minister's hands on the other head of the barrel, and press well, until he revives in place; and if you see this, do it to the tourniquet that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And is that you stick II torches to the head of the sick person with an arm long, and across the other hair, and between each torch, up and down, a palm's space long; and in each torch has I pit, where the turn goes, and let the torch firmly into the ground, so that it does not move; and between each pair of torches has one torch turning, for the sake of the bond which is among the Torches to the head, and the other chain across the hair at the other turn, and each helper turns its turn on all the chain, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, so put it on plaster drying with abundance of wool, and then the stakes, and then the piece of a tablet of III legs long, that forpurify the place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then the thread of a chain, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle fastening, until he is healthy; and if anything comes at the end of the health, so administer soft medicines and soothing, with the piece that we have said before; and never does one administer a piece of lead, and never comes the appearance in the posterior spine of the back, and take care that it is dislocations; and this bone opens, for they say that one should not have presumption: perhaps death would come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	I understand that hip and shoulder dislocations occur only due to dislocation, not as with other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to IV parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, and less front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of their dislocations inside is that when one joins the leg with the sick, it is further away, and more than the leg of the healthy person, so that the patient cannot double his knee; and this is the location which is swollen and heated by an abscess, because the hip joint comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that for whom it comes from behind, is that this accident is opposite to these in front.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that for whom it comes from the front are that his leg is well arranged according to the accomplishment; however, he does not double his knee with pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot go forward, and he holds his urine back, and his ankle swells, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that person who has behind him, if he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the hip joint is relaxed, and the pelvis is in place at the sides of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And those who have this appearance of dislocation should be treated if the dislocation is old and it delays according to its condition, there is no cure; and it is not appropriate that he has pride.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those who have this fresh dislocation, and there are the four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset the joint, and push it inward and outward, and move it from right to left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not come back in this way, it is appropriate that you prepare a strong minister, and hold the leg very firm with two hands, or tie it to a staff so that it cannot move; and other ministers extend their hand above and below at the same time, until the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains stationary.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is so common in four appearances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then you must put the cure on his back correctly as we have said, then tie up the person's legs together, and then tie up the root of the thigh, and then the bandage goes up towards the hip, and then up towards the shoulder; then, grab another assistant to support their arms, and embrace the large band around the hurt hip, and stretch it out to the side: now, it will come back to its place at that time; and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot hold it in this way that we have said, then you must tie the two legs of the person together with a strong bandage around their heels and knees, and make sure the hurt leg is stretched out more than the other; then, hang them from a beam by their ankles, and with long arms; and tell the assistant to embrace the root of the thigh, and let there be other assistants hanging the person up, who will hold onto the hip correctly, for the joint will come back now quite easily.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at a distance, if the patient lies down, as we have said in that which concerns gilhousie, and extrude the tie on the ill-limbed properly, and also on the breast; then place two torches, one on the head and another on the foot, then lay one torch between the thighs of the ill person against the form; and plant a flag of moisture around, that it may not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and let him put the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put him on a table, and press him in the manner which we have spoken of in gilhousie, and lay the patient on his sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are in front, if it is necessary to extend the ill leg suddenly, and according to what I have said; and let the minister hold his pain on the ill foot, then press with the other hand, and extend it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	Et s'il est délocalisé au-delà, il ne convient pas de l'étirer vers l'avant, de le lever sur la terre, mais qu'il soit plutôt étendu comme s'il était dans une position assise, ainsi qu'il a été dit pour le coucher sur les deux hanches; et qu'il soit sous sa face, et que la main soit étendue comme il a été dit ci-dessus, et qu'elle soit pressée sur l'articulation de la table; et elle sera bien lorsque le patient étendra ses jambes, et elles seront longues; alors mets l'ampoule, et tire d'un bandage, afin que la hanche ne bouge pas; et qu'il repose trois ou quatre jours, puis le changez, et mettez l'ampoule dessus; et si vous voyez qu'elles sont longues, alors tirez-les, comme il a été dit ci-dessus, et laissez-les trois jours; puis changez-les, et qu'il fasse du bruit avec ses membres jusqu'à ce qu'ils soient confortés.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the hip
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hip can dislocate in three ways: namely, inward, outward, and backward; but not forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his knee to his chest, and if it does not go to his chest, then know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all this is that you cause the patient to sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his kneecap in your palms, and pull apart between your two hands, then bend the two ribs of the knee cap together; and others make his foot go into the chest lightly; and apply the plaster, and make him raise his leg to the chest, and hold it firmly together for three or four days, then loosen it. And do not worry about making the patient walk until his limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, then give strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are well.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, and never completely dislocated from each other, and inwards and outwards.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and the movement before the part where it is dislocated: the removers are slight, and one must slightly extend it with his hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated all at once, so that you place the patient upright, and bend it away by the leg, over the ankle; then bring the foot to you with your right hand, and then again with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and tap it gently upwards; and do this twice, as we have said, by tapping and bringing the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, begin the process again, for it will return; and if it does not return thus, so that you make the patient walk on his back on the ground, and place the staff firmly in the ground between his hips, and tie the sheets around him, so that he does not slip; then bend the leg at the knee, and extends it with your hands or with the crutches, that he lie on the staff; then make each minister extend equally, and the staff be close to the hip of the patient for support when you extend him; then place the mires equally at the dislocation in your hands, and other ministers bend the healthy leg away, and the dislocation will return completely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is set in place, put on the plaster and press it down, and shape it, and fasten the foot to the leg, and hold back the tendons that are behind the ankle, so that the ties are not too tight; then leave it for II days or III, and let the ties become soft, if the splint; then take off the splint on the third day or fourth, and let the patient walk after III days. And if he goes forward this term, there is no sure thing than that he still dislocates.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses come out, so that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so that you stretch them smoothly without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way at the base of the foot, so that you make the patient sit on a level place or a table all straight, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot down as it grows back, and when it is even, and there is nothing more to open, take off the splint from the base of the foot with a table at II degrees, then shape it, and leave it for III days, then take it off; and let him rest, until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs with dislocation, and it is restored, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not pitiful and merciful and tardy, do not be too bold; and use at the beginning things that calm the abscess with hot, and leave the patient to God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, now put the member back in place, so that the hot ones come; and when the member is in place, administer things that dry out the abscesses, and cure the wound, as is right, with ointments; and if there is fracture with dislocation, and small bones are broken, mend them, and do as we have said for simple illnesses; and guard yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, because that will cost you dear according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming and strengthening your body.
Amen	Amen
