O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the essence of medical science, together with its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is a part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is treated in our region and is strange from all sides, it is very difficult to find the science and knowledge, and it is not delayed by the force of the hands except for the small descriptions in books of the ancient ones that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity, and the intentions are closed, and knowledge is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or I think that I will make it alive together with the order of this physician according to the path of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and I will come together with the shapes of the tools of cautery, and the other instruments of the work, with the assistance of the explanation and preparation of it, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who deals with this to surmount in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the limbs, and the shapes and connections and separations of the nerves, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and veins and their number, and the movement and the veins that move and those that rest, and the place of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, as Hippocrates says, "The non-existent is not with the existent, and with work it is small, and most of all in the art of hands."
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that if anyone is not familiar with the things mentioned above, he may fall into error and harm others; so that I have repeatedly seen many of those who engage in this science and, abandoning their knowledge and experience, are lost.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I have seen a foolish man who cut an abscess on the scalp or the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries at the base of the neck; so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another foolish man who was leading a stone-worker's son by the hair; and the boy was very big, so he took a piece of his bladder and killed him in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also seen a man called Lou the Tacker; and I saw the disposition of the patient and the greatness of the stone, and if they had tacked him, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And see another case which came for treatment. i. a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor, ignorant, pulled out the break over the wound as he bandaged it tightly, leaving no scar, and left it so. And he ordered that it should not be removed; and it waited so long that the leg completely withered away and the bones came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way to corruption was confirmed or member, and he could not make it well; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the members were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another case which came for treatment. i. an abscess which was putrefied, and then inflamed by the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancre, when it is purred of melancholy humor, there comes no other way than to touch it with iron if it is not in its right place so that one can take away all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into .ij. divisions: namely, where there is danger in many conditions; and I will show in each division of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this reason, you must keep this secret so that the foolish man cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	If you take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that, through the grace of God, you come to salvation and are healed; and ward off your weapons from that which makes you doubt, and believe in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien warns against some of his advice: "Do not take care of any bad disease unless you are called foolish."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to the following three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are on fire cauters and medical waters, and the final chapter is on the forms of instruments, the tools for cauterizing, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is on shaping and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the final chapter is on ordering and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torques and similar things; and it is ordered that the loins be stretched up to the chest, and that the forms of the tools be defined.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I give the quality of help and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science, and the secret answers to it; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree upon it; and I lack words for these, for they are long.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery helps all complexions where there is matter; namely, hot-tempered people who have dry matter and cold-tempered people who have wet matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together with matter, some agreed and said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is of no help to disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be cured of hot disease by heat, nor of dryness by dryness; and he who said the opposite, that cautery does great help to hot and dry disease that comes in the body of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man with his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have never found it by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every path, does not interfere but he who has experienced it, and who knows through long practice the cauterizing ointment, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the remedies and the space of time; of other complexions we have no fear, even if they are cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this will come together and agree with the cauterizing.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that a fire cautery all at once so that it is secret and helpful to the cure, and of greater goodness than an aromatic medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes not forward but to the member which is cooked, and does not harm another member as much as it can.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another by moving away, and bring illnesses of great healing to the member, and sometimes they cause sickness.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance, does not burn, unless there is an excess of it.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experience and by the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and therefore I apologize for the length of the speech, for it does not please me that I should reveal the secret of fire, which is hidden from men, and the quality of the work, as the philosopher says in his demonstration; so receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be made at the time of the moon's quarter-phases; and let them be said.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all seasons, for because the sudden harm resulting from the aid of cauterization; and most especially, the cauterization is for necessary pains that cannot wait until the season when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And I don't think ever, son, as they do so; for in the illness that is healed by cauterization there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they believe, since cauterization is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine because of its haste in effecting its value, and for its greatness and dignity.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it may happen that the illness comes not according to the complexion of the sick person and his place of illness and its virtue; and are gathered in him the excesses by the acquisition of meat and similar things, if it is not that cauterization is administered in the place where he has a little excess of moisture, so as to do away with pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but that happens less.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And yet few people understand that fire cautery is a form of medicine, and this is evident; but they do not believe that cautery is effective after medicine, but their understanding is wrong, and fire cautery is a form of medicine because when we administered methods of cure for various diseases and they did not work, then we administered fire cautery, and it worked.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, understand that fire cautery is a form of medicine, not because of the intentions of foolish people.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that gold cautery tools are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated that the quality and purity of gold makes it superior; they also said that the heat of gold does not cause corruption, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and I have found that in some people it does work; and gold cautery is more effective than iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And know that when you heat gold tools, you do not recognize when they are too hot due to the color of gold, and they often cool down soon; and if you heat them too much; then put them in the fire; and so there is enough hesitation.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you shall read this chapter up to the point where the vision is clearer so that you may find it easier to locate.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purified with a solvent medicine, which will remove the pain in 3.3 or according to what the virtue and freshness and the habit of the sick person can bear; and then apply the medicine to the head of the sick person.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then put the cross between your hands, and place his hands on his feet; after that place the roots of your two palms on the roots of his two feet between his .ij. toes; and as soon as you come to him, let him bleed a little, then heat the cautery which is called "oliver", from which this form is:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it over the red mark, and make a small cut as you descend and remove his hand little by little while turning it; then let go of the joint, and rub the joint until you see the bone 1.1 small piece; and if you do not see it, then start the cautery as soon as you see the bone as I told you; after that take 1.1 piece of silk, and put soft cotton in it, and put on the mark, and leave it for 1.3 days; after that put moistened cotton on it; and let it be until it is hot enough to see the bone; then cure the wound with an ointment called "tetrarchal formula", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And say the old one that the longer the wound is open, the more it will be purified; and for this reason if you are in a hurry.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And none of these said that one should let the cautery burn so much part of the bone is burned, and then release what is burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said that one should let the cautery burn so much as a woman puts her finger in her cunt to let the humors come out, and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which one must cure and patch it up.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these 2 methods of cauterizing do not seem to me to be good in all respects except that they might be useful in some men who have a tendency to fear; and I think that I should let them burn, for the joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other limbs; and even more so when the joint of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first application of cautery seems to me to be safer and milder, and from this I practice cauterizing in a way that will bring about healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	for the pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Pay attention so that the patient's head is of strong nature and is not too cold; then apply the fire cautery quickly as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the fire cautery to each horn of the head, as we have said above, and applying the same cauterizing liquid called "vaselz"; then place the vinegar; and arrange your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pain in this cauterization is much greater than in the others, and I will speak about it later; and it is necessary for the horns to be smaller than those on which we cauterize the scalp, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly in one part of the head there is pain and it extends to the oil, and the head is cleansed with medicinal drugs, and other cures have been made as I said in the division of illnesses, and all this does not benefit: then make cauterizations according to .ij. ways, that is to say, with water medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	When making a water medicine cauterization, take a piece of bark and peel it back and cover it with .i. poc as many times as there are joints, and then apply the temple where the pain is in a partial way that you can dip the bark into the oil; and when it has been dipped, let it lie and tighten well and leave it like this for 10 hours; and then remove it and treat with fresh bark, and leave the wound like this for .iij. days or two days; and then put cotton soaked in butter on it until it is healing well.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil treatment until it is well healed; and if you see that fire medicine may be useful, which I have written about or second healer of burning drugs.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cauterization: Heat the cautery so that it is according to this manner:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	Et est apelez "clos" por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d'un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparence; et le met sor le leu doloureux, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l'espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n'arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a cloak or there is little of the collar, and in the middle of a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and take your hand and turn the fire a little lightly, until the half of the keur espés is burnt; and release your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is distant, and run an abundance of blood.
de emigraine	de emigr
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Quant tu cures emigraine si com nous avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que le cautere devant dis de la médecine et du fer ne lui soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est appelé "cultellare" tant qu'il soit blans; et signe ainsi sur le lieu douloureux une ligne de demi doigt de long, et osté ta main une fois, et l'estrains que tu ne coper l'artere et que ne viennes jusqu'à l'os; et te garde de la mandibule qui mute quant on mords, et le ner n'ait regart que la mutation et que les spasmes ne viennent maladement, et te garde de la décomposition du sang de l'artere lorsqu'elle est copée, ou copée ait grand peur et surtout à celui qui ne s'en konoit, et qui n'est ni étudiants ni éprouvés; et laisse l'œuvre en mi voie; mais je vous dirai comment on retient le sang lorsqu'l'artere est copée, et je vous montrerai au livre où il afiert en ce traité.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the neck too as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization which we have said or the chapster of the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizing knife that has .ij. blades; and this cauterization is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	for pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ears due to cold occurs, and one has applied the solute medicines and other treatments which we have mentioned in the division of this chapter, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cauterization which is called "poins", whose form is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing all around the ear on the sick side, or around the two sides of the ear where the pain is located, and moving away from the root of the ear a little bit as you have marked the spot; make .x. punctures around each ear; after that, treat the spot until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	which must be cured by cauterization is not strong except for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply cauterization to similar things which come from dryness and waste of semen.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves with fluid from thirst and purging of the head and gargling, and that is not worth it, then you should apply three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further away in the temple, and the third in the joining of the two lips; and place the cautery in the healthy part, and let it burn for half the time; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the form of the scalpel that we have put forward, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the blade be a little thicker; after cure the place as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, it does no good, and the patient has no fever, so then do 22 cauterizations: 16 on the two horns of the head, and 1 each where it is called "vesselz", just as we have said above, and a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach; and be cured just as we have said above.
de litargie	of lime
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This text describes a treatment for a disease (perhaps cerebral hemorrhage or stroke) involving the use of lime to create a "lime plaster" for the head, followed by the application of a "saffron poultice" made from saffron and water, which is then placed on top of the lime plaster. The treatment is completed with a cauterization process, as described in the previous sentence.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is this way, it is good; and if it is not, then do 22 cauterizations of the scalp by going down to the base of the neck, and space out each cauterization by 1/2 inch; and the cure as we have said before, and if he still has fever, then do 1 cauterization in the middle; and if it is necessary, 2 others on the two horns, and cure him until he is well; and be the cauterizations which are called "olive", as we have said above.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	to warm the head of the patient, then wash it with water and salt as we have said before; then apply fire cautery to the head and to each horn, and behind and above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is strong, apply four fire cauterions to the spine of the back; and let it burn until the hair at the base is singed, and lift your hand; then cure as much as possible so that it is healed, and the cautery that is called "oliver" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	from epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	For those with a feverish reaction to fire cautery, it is necessary to first warm the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the chapter where the patient is very ill and suffering from feverish reactions to fire.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot bear the fire, he makes gargling and chewing to clear the throat with bone meat; after him, he takes the head in the middle, and does 1.i. cautery according to what we have said before, and 1.i. cautery on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is far away and suffering, he does cauterizations as I said to that who has paralysis and softening of the spine, on the back bone and the neck, and let the cauterizations be olive according to the manner which I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child, he does 1.i. subtle cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When, by the cause of melancholy, there are excesses or corrupt humours and thick fluid, then the half-cautery which we have said to that who has paralysis:
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if, by the cause of melancholy, there is decline in the excesses towards melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he does something to refresh the brain according to what it is before in the division:
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cutting the head of the patient; after making .i. tortois shell out of fine linen, also as .i. circle, put it under the head; and the patient's face should be crossed and held firm from all sides; then present the liniment, and cover it with old sheep's butter; and heat the fire moderately, so that it can be endured by the patient; after filling the shell inside the head, and letting it cool down; and do this to the patient every week once with other good government, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you want to cauterize the wound by making several punctures all around it. This way of cauterizing dries up the brain a bit; and then put cotton wetted in butter and in lard on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the signs come first as eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient purifying thing the head, and the guard of all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples si li dessendemens de l'awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	After he has ordered his head to rise, and made a fire cautery on the head, and made .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if he is dislocated from the jaw; or if in the dislocation the jaw comes out of its socket, all the cauterization should be done on the veins and arteries that are behind the cheekbones, and the cautery should be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the escape of blood, and if you see too much blood come out, then stop it with a cloth as you have.
dou cors des larmes	And two cor des larmes
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	For when the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delez the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one can see that it is cold and phlegmatic surplusage, then he does the fire cautery that I said at the beginning of the aweth: 1 cautery emmi le chief, et 2 cauteres sus les 2 temples, et 2 cauteres ou haiterel desoz les 2 os; and if it has been necessary, if the cauterize well on the sorcil completely at all little cautere.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	Of the tears of fire within the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Now, as for the remedies according to what we said in the division of the head, and it does not benefit, so then he drinks the evil poison; after that, he re-sets the head, and makes cauterization with olive oil; and he makes 2 cauterizations on the 2 scalds, a little on the hair; and you should guard against the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterization which is called "Clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization of this cauterization which is called "Olive" is made. Of which this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that the hair has grown as long as the scalp is, and let it not be cut except when the third part of the paper has been burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	The hair that points to the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No one has yet discovered that the hair of the oil is converted to the parched, and grasps the oil, and it is made on 1.1 ways: that is to say, by fire, or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient on your breast; after signing on the paper of the hairs a figure that is also like the furrow of the mirth, and is the beginning of the sign that detaches the hairs; then put cotton wet in pitch and muskellaige of persillion on the oil, and heat up the cautery with which there is this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the healing is at the place; and the sign of the work of health is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs rise to the height of the oil; then lift your hand up, and leave it so for  .iij. days, then put cotton wet in butter as long as the heating is done; after the cure of the wound until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper is softened then restart the cautery on that same middle place, as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and is even, and do not prick the hair oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical hot cautery is that you order to the patient that he leaves the hairs as long as they are even and big, then make of parchment the shape of the furrow of mirth; then take French soap and lively salt, each one a  .Z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that if it does not cool down, then pour on the shape that you have made like the furrow of mirth, and put on the paper of the hairs; and if the illness holds in  .i. oil only, then work also in  .i., and if also in water; and put cotton wet in pitch; and the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have been ill for a long time, keep this medicine at your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the medicine has passed, lift up your chin and hold it up as if it had been lifted by a fire or an incision; and if this is so, that's good. If not, put the medicine back on the spot where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are long and even, and your nails are cut short; then put cotton soaked in oil over the sore spot called "dysentery" and other spots, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to hold your chin well up so that it does not move from the medicine applied to your hairs; and if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair is pricked by the oil, then repeat the medicine on the same spot where the paper has become soft properly, just as you have done before; after the cure until it is healed; and this is the form of the oil dou mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hair of men is different in length and thickness, and according to this your constraints; and do not reply the right path to anyone whose study is this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have described in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit them, then you must apply cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip the hair between your hands in a basin of water or wine juice over oil; then heat the cautery until it is red-hot: and apply it to the hair at the base, as if it were a feather; together, let the tip of the cauterium be directed towards the head, so that you do not burn the skin; but rather, let the fire be directed only at the hair.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the porosity, and drying it; and if it is closed, then operate, and seal it with fire; after which, place the hot cauterium firmly on the hair, and keep your hand away from the cauterium at the base of the hair, that your hand does not go wild; and place the cautery in the oil, and corrode it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to cauterize up to the bone, it would be better. If not, then start cauterizing again after one more day, and if you need to do so, and leave it .iiij. days; after that put cotton soaked in water on it until it is healthy, and for ten days after it is healthy, then put medicine with corrosive water until the bone is uncovered; and treat according to what comes out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And I have a way of cauterizing a fistula that no one of the ancients spoke of. Understand fistula, and cut it; then put in the incision .i. subtle camahan so that this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I form it in quantity of a 1/4 of a pound; and hold your hand where the camahan is firmly, and do not move the patient at all so that the melted plonk does not run to its oil; and it comes if you put cotton soaked in water in a bowl or in a basin: the plonk so art the leu de fistule, and he heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to pierce the nose, and bring back the fistula to the root of the nose according to what comes out in his chapter.
des crevaices en levres	of the crevices in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	the times when crevices form in the lips, which are called "hair", and most often on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices with the treatment we have described in divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small surgical scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it firmly in the crevices as long as it comes out clean; after the cure, apply balm to the area until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the palate or the roots of the teeth, after causing pus and swelling and becoming hollow and infected; you treat it as we have said in the division, and it does not help: so you should use a fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; then you seal it or pierce the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the bottom of the hole, and behind it; and do this once or twice, after the treatment we have described, as long as he is healthy; and if he is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, you should discover the root and remove the rotten bone according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and the tooth does not respond, then place the head of the patient in your lap; after heating the cautery, shape it so that you can put a wire on the tooth; place the cautery hotly inside the tooth, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the process according to your will; after filling the mouth with salt water, and keeping it there for an hour and rinsing it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And this is the way to treat those who were moving tightly, and the gums softened restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold or sight, and medicine does not help, then there is a need for fire cauterization according to the following two ways: and fire cauterization with butter and fire cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Fire cauterization with butter: Take butter from a vat and stick a small iron or gold wire into it; after that, take cotton and wrap it around the end of a needle, dip it in butter, and place it on the aching tooth carefully; hold it there until the butter cools; do this often until the power comes to the root of the tooth, and if the wool and cotton become wet with butter, and put it on the tooth, and put on 1 iron wire as hot as possible until the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	If the fire cautery is such that you squeeze a ferret-iron or an iron ring, and it's big so that the fire doesn't come to the mouth of the sick person; after warming the cauterizer, from which the form will come later, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer has cooled down; do this often, because the pain will be worse the next day or the day after. And it is convenient that the sick person fill his mouth with good fat in the haste of the cauterizer, and then wipe it off: and this is the form of the cauterizer.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery out of the root of the tooth that you want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the iron:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of pus and cold dampness, and does not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery tooth with which this comes later, and has 1.3 openings for the fumes to rise from the cauterizer on the other side; and place the cauterizer hot on the abscess once, or if it is small, place the cauterizer according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it in that condition for 1.3 days; and put cotton wet with oil on it until the burning is over; then cure the wound with garlic and tar as long as it is healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture prevails over the chin, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be voided first by restorative medicines; after which make cauterization at the root of the throat, and guard against coming any further than the throat, and dare not kiss but a little. After making .i. another cautery to the jointure of the neck with the head of the spine, and let the cauteries be called 'clavicle' from which we have the form before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of the mouth are cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorbutic illness, and is an ancient disease, then one should make iij. cauteries on the forceps in his lips; and another cautery pour the juice between .i. two breasts; and let the cauteries be called 'clavicle' according to the form that is before said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see it, make cauterization in piercing all the cauterization that is called  'poins' from which the form is before in the disease of the ears; and let be the points up to .iii. or enqui entor. After cure the place according to what is before said, and let be the cauteries to .iij. rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason the cautery is lighter, because you make it like this...
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, have the patient lie down on their back and on their left side; then heat the cautery to .iij. ners and apply it to the joint as follows:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the wound until it reaches the rib cage, and the form of the cauterization comes together with the cautery that has three nerves, because the nerve is according to the subtlety of a thread and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And never apply to this one nerve because there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the fire cautery, treat with water; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated from above, let there be little pain, then apply cauterization to the thick cautery, or many cauterizations that pierce. Because the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the disease is cured.
dou cautere de pleuresin	To cure pneumonia.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	To treat pneumonia, they say one should use roots of arnica, and in this way: take a long root of arnica, the largest you can find, dry it, and make it as thick and long as your two hands; then soak it in oil, hold it over the fire, and cauterize. i.e., cauterize between the clavicle and the neck, and ii. small cauterizations a little down the side of the beard; and ii. cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, by leaning back a little; and i. cauterization under the breast, and i. another over the stomach, and i. between the shoulders, and ii. small cauterizations from the back, away from the shoulder; and do not squeeze your hand, but make an open gesture as if smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	No older person said that anyone should use fire-like cauterization, and scratch and put it between the ribs, as much as it comes to the aphesis; and they say that one feels pain, as we have said in the aphesis of the liver. But in this chapter there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse of what we have said about the division of the treatments, and it does not benefit, then they devoted .ii. ways to cauterize that all are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of which there is one way such that you make .ii. cauterizations, or .iii., in according to the length of the mouse, in according to the shape of the fire cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the mouse be sore on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery which has 10 ners, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery where the mouse's cut comes from left to right, and let the elevatons that you feel where the mouse was cut be according to the length of his back, and the cauterization is according to the width of his back.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, the 10 ners are heated until the elevatons are felt from the other side, and then the cautery is taken away, and in doing so there will be .iii. ways. And if you see, then cauterize all of it with 10 ners. After the cure has been applied for a long time, and this will suffice that the other cure mentioned before is sufficient.
de ydropisie	about gout
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	For gout, except in the manner called "asclepiades." When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in the divisions, and your treatment is of no use, then you should do .iiij. cauterization around the boude, and .i. on the stomach, and one on the liver, and .i. on the kidney, and .ij. behind the back on the spine, and .i. on the testicles; and let the cauterizations be close to the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, keep the cauterization in place for a long time, and do not remove the treatment from the patient after the cauterization; and with God's help, healing would be quicker, and both of the two intentions would come together with God's aid.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cauterization for the stomach is the one that we have mentioned before; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it has been described above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the fingers
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the fingers are swollen in a person who is ydropical, and they are plain yellow, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the index finger and the middle finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too much into it, so as not to force the yellow liquid, and make the cauterization according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After making 20 cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the toenail; and let the cauterization be long, one behind the knee in front and the other behind, with the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without erasing, so that the awes are made; after curing the others we have said.
de la menoison	of the mansion
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution from the stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach and in the intestines are evaporated, and cannot be cured by any methods; and you see the patient very suffering and of great virtue, so it is done. i.e. a great cautery on the stomach according to what he has talked about here before or the cautery of the stomach, the cautery circulates; and 2.iiij. cauteries around the navel gently to all i. cautery nailed gently, and 15 cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abound and the patient is suffering, make cautery on the wrist, and 1 cautery on each finger, and 2 small cauteries on the stomach, for this cure is profitable when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are or foundation, or one or more, and are old and are cold and damp corrupted humors, and are cured if as we have said in the divisions, and does not benefit, then 2.iiij. cauteries on the spine of the back, this who is completely outside almecdate little and little in triangulating, and 1 cautery on the buttocks; 2 dois
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think his stomach is cool, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swollen, then put great fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse to all the cautery nailed; and leave the cautery open long time. After heal the wound until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the gangrene which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with gangrene, if you heat the cautery which seems sharp, and then put it all on fire on that gangrened coped; and leave it so that the cautery comes to the birth of the vein, where there is little movement; do this once or twice, and if there is more gangrene, cauterize each one as we have said; after the cures of beneficial herbs as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on alchatim, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound badly cured
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot tolerate surgery or opening, which we will describe in detail, if there is a disease that cannot be cured except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When there is a fistula present, and it has become inflamed and has pus and moisture, if the disease can be completely cured with a precise cauterization, and you know exactly how much cauterization is needed; after that, warm the fire instrument which seems sharp, and dip it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the fire as many times as the amount of pus and corrosion that needs to be burned, once or twice or three times according to the quantity of the need; and be careful with the nerves that are in those places, and do not burn them unless they are furred; believe that they are not persisting; after that, cure those places until they are completely healed, and if the matter is not osteized [hardened], know that the disease has been cured entirely; and if the matter is osteized [hardened] at its base, know that the disease has been burned three-quarters of the way, and the bone has been corrupted at its base; and thus as one of these that we will describe in detail.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When there is pain in the kidneys, and a loud windiness, and it does not respond to women's remedies, then you must cauterize the kidneys from both sides with the clove-shaped fire instrument which we have described above; and if we cauterize them in the middle, there will be 2 [cloves] of fire on each side, and it will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak due to lack of urine and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then do a fire cautery in the region below the bladder, where the hair of the genitals encumbes, and so on both sides, and each cautery be as long as a finger; and do a cautery behind the back, where you need it; and let the cauteries be carved according to the form described above.
de la marris	of the mare (horse)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their season is delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: so it is necessary to do 11 cauteries in the region of the womb, as we have said in the bladder cautery, and 9 cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be carved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hips
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip box, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found in the department of the viscera, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip box at .i. a fire cautery resembling a circle, and sign before the joint around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if so, let the cautery be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery is not present, make 3 large olive oil cauterizations, and let the cauterization be also perfect as all the others; and the cure until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hips
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hip of the leg, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division [of treatment], and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purify the patient of the large humors with pills made from rotten substances, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery, and the method of the cautery is according to .ij. methods: that is to say together burning medicines, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to mout de ways, from which one is such: that you cauterize on the hip of the leg  .iij. triangular cauteries according to this form, and make a deep and large one, and between each cautery leave a space the size of a thumb, and let them be olive-colored; never do you make a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, for there are  .iiij. according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery at the cautery of the circle that we have just said before in the dislocation of the hip; but make it in such a way that the circle contains all the hip, and all the space of the wound is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the method that we do in sciatica, when the pain holds in the hip, and does not reach until the thigh or leg; and if it comes only until the thigh and leg, then you make   .ij. cauteries where the patient says that the pain holds, and   .i. cautery on top of the ankle  .iiij. times, a little to one side: and let the cauteries be scalpel-like, and let the thickness of the wound burn; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two toes or near the ankle, then you cauterize at the place where he feels the pain   .iij. points or   .iiij. according to the cautery that is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is a man of trade, he does so much the better; and if he feels that the pain comes from the knee towards the thigh, he makes a cautery with a cuttle or circular knife, and you must take great care in all your cauterizations not to leave any of them so long as they are burning, and that you do no greater harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the sole of the foot and left it so long that the leg was completely gone, and even the bones, and it became perverted and corrupted all the way through. After a dissolution of the entrails, which killed him.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery in each one, according to this way. // And the wise said in the cautery of the ankle, that it is the manner, make a piece of iron and be at the head as well thick as a nail of finger, or a little less, and be between the intertruses and also from the one intertruse to the other space the quantity of a nut of nail; and let the intertruses be over of two parts, and are also like nails, and there is each piece of iron well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be heated so that it is all red and put on, and then put it on the box of the bad ankle, and turn it on the lower back rib; and the cautery once 1 cautery burn and leave 2 days; and then make plaster with oil, and let the wound open long time; after the cure of ointment until it is well.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its smell, and few use it; but this is a good cautery which can bear it, and where it afflicts.
de la dolor dou dos	of the two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from rubbing or from impact or from too much evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, no one of these appearances is worth a cure, except that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is appropriate that after this person has voided the foul pills or other things, one should apply to his back, where the pain is, three lines of three inches long, and in each line make the cauterization according to the cauterization which is called "poins"; and if you see, make 1.5 cauterizations or 2.0 at the clavicle cauterization according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Maitre, many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of trouble are that they have a tight spine when they stand up and are afraid; and you find in the back of the neck and in us the appearance that comes on the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this, and when you have healed it, cauterize it with fire according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	So that the fire is equally red hot on each part of the spine; and if you see it, cauterize it with fire piercing 10 or 15 lines, and let the points be close together. After curing it, as long as it remains healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not use the fire in girder-making which is made of nerve-spines.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the joints ache because of moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes in pieces, which the doctors properly call "rheumatism," and when it is a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicine, then it is cured by cauterizing in this way: make the fire cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the olive cautery follow this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	When it is necessary to strike at the root of the foot, make a fire cautery on all the cauterization that one claims "point." And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make a cautery on each knee with three cauterizations or four on each part, following the whole olive cautery; and if you need more, do more, but do not hold the fire hard except when the root of the pain is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have spoken about in our chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make 16 points around the knuckles; and if there remains any pain in the two joints, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and give him medicines. For if you do this well and purify the flux, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the syrup
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the bowels descend to the loins and is new, so it is necessary that when you look at him to cure, he does not hurt him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after this let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to wash his hair as long as the bowels are repaired, and bring them to your sides, and sign of a half-circle above the navel with one hand; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	as soon as the bowels come down to the loins and is new, so it is necessary that when you look at him to cure, he does not hurt him that day; and use things that leave his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after this let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to wash his hair as long as the bowels are repaired, and bring them to your sides, and sign of a half-circle above the navel with one hand; then heat the cautery where there is this form:
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cautery of children be subtle according to their measure, and that of old people also great according to their measure; after iii days cure his hair with oil as long as he is healthy, and make him lie down for 40 days on his back as long as the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his rinsings be refreshed for a long time, so that the bowel does not come out when he goes to bed.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, give him a well-made bandage, and change it every .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and against too loud yelling; and when he does this teaching, then he is completely cured. And I will say here later the cure of the barber in his chaplet.
de la routure dou ventre	Of a rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let the third be cured; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at the cautery's three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but the first sign is the top of the belly and make a line on its width over the rupture, and another behind, and your hand all around the whole cautery; But the first cauterizations are lighter and more tender.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in any member, or of sitting or of hurting, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it is necessary that he be burned at the fire called "poins", and let the burnings be according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from twists and its pain. If he is cured with the first burning, it is good; otherwise, begin another burning on that one, for such a custom is that it must move to the member that is nearest, so that you must make the burnings until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of meals
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	of meals
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if he feels pain everywhere, and it becomes obvious, then you should cauterize him with these cauterizes that we have described at the head, i.e. cautery in his nose, and ii cauteries on the spine of the neck, and vii cauteries on the spine of the back, and i great ones on the skull, and another delight on the shoulder, and ii cauteries on the shoulders, and ii cauteries on the sides, and ii cauteries on the bones of the hand, and on the pits of the hands; and guard against the nerves that are under his feet, so that you do not burn them, and never make any cautery on the bone of the knuckle, nor another on the bone of the stomach, nor another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I make cauterizes, the more I help and benefit him; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterize as much as a healthy person feels it, because his body is already very corrupted. And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the form of iron. After curing him, let him eat flour of times with honey and other cures until he is healed.
de enfleure	of
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When the swelling comes in any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the member according to its size and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little entering into the flesh of the cure; then heal with ointments until it is healed. And never do cauterization and hand and foot and back, at the outlet of the nerve that silences the member, and thus if it is osted the swelling; and nevertheless does not interfere if he is not familiar with members and outlets of moving nerves.
de albaras	of defenses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is awake, and the medicine does not help, then cauterize with a fine cauterizer according to the size of the flesh, until the blotch is osted and its color changes; then cure with flour and lentils, mixed with roasted oil and plantain leaves, and wormwood and almonds, each in parts; and mix them all together, and bind them with a cloth, and apply them to the affected area until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	For the cure of leperous disease by fire
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When the sore begins to appear, and you keep your eyes open, if you cauterize it with a cautery which seems a circle, go all around the edge of the sore. And yet, there are those who say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the sore; and yet, I do not think this is good, for I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it done before; and it is better that it be cauterized all around, with a cautery called "circular", as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the fever which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die or because of the excess of blood that it makes or because of the age of the sick person when he is very old and has little blood, or because of the heat of the disease when he is very hot, and you see him hastening to die: then cauterize him all around with small cauterizations by poking; after which let him be. For she will hurry to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you pierce her all over with the cautery, making the cautery very hot, then:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauterization has not finished healing, and make it such a cauterization that the patient feels relief in one way or another so that the course of the corruption is chosen. After the cure until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of a disease called "corrodens", and is no more than a member putrefaction, for it corrupts the members as the fire dries them up. If you see this disease in its early stages and can use cauterization with fire, then heat the nails carefully, large and small, according to what suits the place of the disease; after cauterizing all around until you have removed all corruption, and nothing remains but the corroded members themselves, which are burnt up by the fire. And then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil on the cauterized places so that the burns from the fire heal, and all corruption is removed. After the oil cure, if health does not return after .iij. days, start again the cauterization on those which are still corroded. And this putrefaction is never cured with medicinal oil instead of fire cauterization; but fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already spoken about the cure with medicinal oil in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of radishes which come from the ground
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mouth of times there is that the hairs by default grow a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a gross thing seeded which bleeds the foot. And the cauterizations of this disease are as follows: .ij. ways. That is to say, fire cauterization, and water cauterization. Fire cauterization is such that you heat up .i. cauterization tool like a vulture's beak, and it must be made of good iron in the measure that it can pierce the nail from all sides, and it has fine margins; then place it all hot on the nail, and bring your hand entirely around the nail until it comes to the base; and leave it so .iij. days until it starts to rot; then make an ointment of wild mallows crushed with water, and leave the ointment on all night, and let the nails dry up and will be rooted from their roots. Then cure the wound with salt as much as it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if the body is converted by default, and many times are put on hands and feet, it is appropriate that you bring fire cauterization; and this is a third way: take an iron or metal wire, or a vulture's beak, and place it on the nail and the athelous part, that is to say, make warts; then place the wire on so that it bleeds all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the margin of the wire comes to the base of the nail, and can find the deep path of hot water until the root; and let the patient feel a little the burning of the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will be rooted from all its roots. In this way do one after another, until you have removed all those that are in the body, then cure the wounds with salt as much as they are healthy.
li cure dou trembler	And cure the shaking.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	Here is the translation of the text:
des pustules puans	For the pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	For the pus-filled blisters that appear on the body, which come from corrupt substances, it is necessary to make a cauterization on each bump: a thin cauterization made with mugwort, which is held in the fire, or with the root of aristo, or with the lenticular cauterization. And it is not necessary to do this at the very beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further, but are broken up and healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	For when an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Maitres doctors, I pray you to hear my words and to pay attention to the advice that I am about to give on this most important of topics. For there are many times when a great deal of trouble can come from the blood in the arteries, which comes out onto the skin when cutting into an abscess or cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Many times there is great trouble from the blood in the arteries, which comes out onto the skin when cutting into an abscess or cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a terrible thing to smell. And you must do this: when one of these happens, immediately put your index finger on the vein, and strain it until the blood stops flowing from the wound with your other hand, and do not allow any drops of blood to fall; then take some olive oil, small or large as the wound requires, and heat it thoroughly until it is completely red; then dip  .i., that is, a cotton swab, a piece of wool, or a piece of cloth into the hot oil, and hold it over the vein at which you are holding your finger, or where you are holding your finger, and keep the oil in place until the blood has stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bleeds when you lift your finger from the vein, and the oil has cooled, then quickly take another swab, or a piece of wool or cloth, dipped in hot oil, and hold it over the place where you lifted your finger until the bleeding stops.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood has stopped; and be aware that you should not burn the nerve which is delicate, and that no other harm should come to the patient; and know that when the artery has been cut, it cannot be well healed unless one of the four ways that we have said is used: or by cauterizing, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying it, or by putting medicines on it which have the power to stop bleeding; and let it be bound and held tightly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a hot poultice closely wrapped around the wound or place burning things upon it, or other similar things, unless he does so to no avail?
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	Who will administer a hot poultice closely wrapped around the wound or place burning things upon it, or other similar things, unless he does so to no avail? If there is no medicine or remedy present, one must place his index finger upon the edge of the wound as we have said, and hold it firmly over the wound and the edge; and do not move it, but wet it often with cold water until the blood is frozen and thick and solid; and make incisions in front of the area where cauterization and medicine are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	Here begins the second book of treatments for wounds. We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cauterization, or burning medicine, and the methods, causes, tools, and shapes of cauterizations are needed; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning, and I will go on from there in this chapter by that same path for those who wish to heal more lightly than those who desire it.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin this, it is necessary, oh man, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterices, and for this reason it is necessary to be more cautious.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I advise you not to take any foolish actions. For such things often come from people who, because of the severity of their illness and the greatness of their wickedness, die easily due to the mischief that their disease brings about, and because of the great evil in their illness; and for this reason one should be afraid.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who have such a way of thinking, who say: "Wait, I am going to die"; and the disease is spiteful. It is not good that you consent to such people who come to you who have this manner; but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open your doors foolishly but carefully confirm what you are certain of, and what you may have taken from him; and use prophecy and indication when treating your sick, so that health may be converted; and he who will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Here is the translation:
dou chief plein d’aigue	Here is the final sentence for you to translate. Please provide your own translation if you would like me to compare it to mine or if you would like to see it in another format:
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and all those that I have seen die quickly; and for that reason it seems to me that it is better to delay the work of this chapter in the treatment.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child where the head was swollen with water, and each day it swelled more until he could not support his own weight; and because of the moisture it came to be as if dead, and this moisture, so gathered around the bone under the skin, between the skull and the bone; and the work of this chapter, so is this moisture gathered around the bone under the skin, and the abscesses are small, that you cut a wide slit in the head at the top; and be also as far apart as possible, so that the moisture runs; and see here the form of the spetumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess is larger, then make two slits in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is outside the bone, and the signs that you see are the folds of the skin on either side, and when you press it with your hand from the inside, there is no response; then cut three slits in the form of this way:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, draw out all the moisture. After drawing out the bandages and powders, pour wine and oil, and leave it thus until the fifth day; then unbind it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head be drawn out evenly, and give the patient dry meat soaked in a little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you look at the opening of the aposteme, and the joining of the astringent; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So size it accordingly, and fill it according to your ability, and beware that you do not plug the artery; and bring forth blood, so that the patient may die of thirst and due to the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a person has a disease called "cataract" in the eye or in the knee, and the disease is old, and medicine does not benefit him, then the next treatment is to cauterize with that which covers the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	When the person's eyes are covered with a film, and the disease is old, and medicine does not help him, then, when you peel back the skin, the patient should rub his head with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and then extract the patient's tongue to all 1/4th of a cloth; then look where the vein goes, and their necks are both on the sides of their ears, and they have been torn; then sign the necks with one and the other of two spatulums that are sharp at both ends, as far as the bone comes out, and this one is done by the large side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, you should remove the blood vessel with the spatulum and cover it on top, cutting it like two sides with two spatulas at the same time.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, let it continue to flow upward without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Et si le sang ne sort pas au toucher, il convient que tu mesures la quantité de l'espace de .iij. doses, puis signe d'encore et fente jusques à l'os; et celui que il convient de mettre de sang est vj c/, et par aventure un peu plus ou moins. selon ce que le malade peut souffrir, et la repletion de l'artere; puis regarde la plaie: s'il reste sur l'os point d'écoulement, si le cope que apostèmes chaus n'i veigne, puis estrange la plaie et lie, et la cure d'oignement tant qu'elle soit guérie.
de emigrainne	And if the blood does not flow upon touching, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of 3 doses, then sign to stop and cut as far as the bone; and that which is to be put of blood is vj c/, and by chance a little more or less. according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no drainage, if the plug that absces chaus does not come out, then extrude the wound and bind, and the cure of ointment as long as he is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient migraine comes, and catarrh acquired, because of the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old feverish and similar things, and it is medicated by the methods of medicine and all that does not benefit him, then we extrude the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, if as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient should grow his hair on his temples again, and feel the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well with its beating, and is not much filled except in some people who are too cold; and if it is filled, then remove its neck with some drapes, then rub its place with any rough cloth, and raise the place of hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula where there is this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	And then peel the skin slightly until you feel the artery, and then turn it up like pincers, and completely remove the webs that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it into a point with the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of .ij. degrees. Because if it is not cut, then there will be no saving of anything at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And turn the blood of 1/4th to 1/3rd, and if the artery is large, then tie it with a double strong silk thread, that it not be broken before the wound's healing; then cut off the excess that is between the 2 threads at that moment as well, and then, if you see, then cauterize with fire from the cautery knife until the bone is reached, and this is the work of the surgery, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cautery is an aid to finish off the moisture: for this is a greater aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Ou il convient por l'extraction des arteres que om remplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se sans court de l'artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l'estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n'as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d'aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il convient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l'extraction de l'artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cet cautere trenchant de  .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the .ij. tools a .i. inch of space, and then when you have cut into the .ij. veins, and you measure with the sharp edge on top until it reaches the bone, and cap the voice in .ij. veins; and they are separated between the .ij. shoulders because it is not softened by this cautery from all sides; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes run down into the veins that are under the skin of the head of force, and the medicine I make does not benefit him, and you see the face of the sick person turn black, and feels a cold movement as if it were frost; and since they are kept and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall, and the papers get burned and scalded by the heat of the tears, then there is need for this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "old cure", and that is what you do to the sick person whose hair is at the front, then make .iij. cuts at the front equally long; and one of the cuts be as much as .ij. two all along the front up to the nose, and the other .ij. two at the sides over the papers, and keep your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. mandibles, and each wound have the quantity of .iij. dos;
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and then put on a piece of sponge and soak it with the water of the springs, then pour the sputum out from the two parts where this form is;
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	"And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady..."
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	"And if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady and keep them still until you reach the middle cut; and if they prick again, hold them steady again until you reach the other side; then remove the sharp edge and express the blood; then put a piece of fine cotton cloth in each cut, and cover it with wet linen dipped in wine and oil and mustard, and make sure that the feet don't come into contact with it; and on the third day unbind him, and apply a great amount of cold water, then apply the basilicon ointment with oil of roses, and other cures for wounds, until he is healed."
dou reume des eulz	"And then remove the sharp edge..."
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is no catarrh coming by custom, and you see the hairs drawn back and small, and the vision weakens, and the paper burns; and the hair is scattered, and where it chief hurts a pain, and the patient coughs; then know from these accidents that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the cure that is for them, if it is this, so it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And so you command the patient to rub his forehead, then make a wide cut across the forehead, and another large incision from side to side; and start from the cut on the left temple to the right temple, and cut all the way down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when he drinks; and when the bone is exposed, then wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then tie cotton wool and linen thereon; then lay wet cloths in wine and oil, and beware of an abscess; when it is exposed, so you must rub the bone until the char begins to be born, then cure it with dry things, which cause chaps.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take .iiij. parts of flour of rice, and .iii. parts of kollofyn, and make a plaster therewith; and apply it to these wounds in order to produce chaps everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stiffening of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All who have ears are of the four things: or grain, or beast, or stone, or similar thing as iron; or seed, as peas and beans; or flowing thing like water and easily moving and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	For when it chills in the ear stone or another manner of thing that does not fit into the ear, nor does it grow in the ear, so put the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then pour a drop of violet oil or seed oil; then it is extracted, and the work is to shake it, and the nose stops when the shaking comes, and puts cloth or wool pieces behind the ear; and raises the ear up. Many times this cure comes; and if it does not come, it is extracted with gentle pincers, from which there is this form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the pincers, it is good; if not, then extract it with a small double hook; and if it does not jump out with that, make a chain of raindrops and put the end of the chain or a small passageway in the ear very hard, and stop what is inside with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the chain; then try to force it, because many times it comes like this as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, take glans from it, and put cotton in some tool which is right for what you want to do, and put a drop of cotton; then press the glans on the stone or whatever it is, and try to force it.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it does not jump out with any of these things that we have said, then cut the ear so that the aposteme is split, and spasms; and the way to cut it is that you first extract the disease from the head of the skull, and draw blood according to the measure of its virtue, then put the sick person between your hands and turn their ear up, and make a small cut at the root of the ear with grease or something hanging; and let the cut be as the moon, until you touch the stone, then press it according to your strength, and suck it gently into your mouth; and the cure until they are well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grain that has become damp and begins to swell, extract it; and if it cannot be extracted, make a thin paste of it according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	And make an incision in the grain but do not make it when you think that the grain is moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them carefully and finely with a blade and add to the syrup, as we said, so that the extractions are ordered.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	So that the patient uses sneezing with condiments first and wipes the ear with old cotton. And be careful on which ear he has fluid. If it is, it's good. If not, take many little stones according to the length of your finger and make them hot on the fire; and put one or two of them in his ear, and pull them out from the other side, and take another stone from the ear that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this with a stone in an ear until all the fluid has come out, and so it comes out completely; and if you see, take a piece of straw, and bottle one of the ears, and the other ear take fire from the straw, as we said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the best, if it is a small worm, such as a flea or similar thing, cure it as we said in the division; but if it is a large one that can be felt, make an incision with a blade; and this is the lightest thing to extract from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where we treat the distillations, and the cure does not profit, if it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there are no worms, take the pinches softly, and if they do not appear, take the hair of where it is the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And be tight below and wide above. And pour the subtlest chief into the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck all the way; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, if you break in with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not rise up as we have said, administer distillations which the old ones have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where we treat the distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, where it is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be tight below and wide above. And make a small hole for distillation with an instrument of silver or gold, and press it above to distil; and to squeeze the distillation into an instrument of silver very well made for sucking, and if you see that you have taken a razor and wrap cotton around the tip; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines in the hair, and let the hair be in the ear; then pour the oil into the razor with all the cotton, and press your hand firmly so that the oil is distilled from the ear; and have the patient smell it, and let the distillation burn slightly at the fire as we do when we distil in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the sticking up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without a piercing in their ears; and this same thing happens to men due to an upward movement of the ear, or a horse's hoove inside it, and such a piercing often comes all the way into the ear if one cannot see it; and there is no piercing of the ear,
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then let the ear of the patient face the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation become apparent, then that is all this spice has done to it:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	and cut it open before and behind all the plain, so that it doesn't break the ear; if the piercing is a horse's hoove or a corset of the ear, then hold it with subtle pinches and gently bend it until the hoove is all boneless.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the inflammation is completely in the ear, then take a fine, light razor and warm it slightly, then place it at the base of the ear. If you feel the inflammation that the patient feels as a grating sound when he hears, pierce lightly and be careful not to hurt the ear nerves; then put into the ear a tent according to its width from the hole, and moisten with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make no incision until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle it with vitriolic broach; and if you see the ear escape, cover it so that you take out the tent and move another tent moistened with rosin made of rosewater and wax, until the inflammation is removed; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain of inflammation comes, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that treat the pain of inflammation which are or prepare distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	"And if not, then with the fire of the small lenticular cautery, and the cautery after the incision is made; and many times they return, as nothing remains at their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back."
de la gresle	"of the grief"
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	"Many times come in papers one thing that seems like green in its form and in its dureness, and because of this disease is called "hay fever", and is an assembly of moisture thick in the paper on top and below; The ovraiges are these: take care if the hay fever is silent of one part and of another, and it is a light thing to know; make the cut wide, then the scorch of each part lightly, then take it to the pincers, and the cope. If you cannot cover it without piercing the paper, so do not harm the patient; and if the split is great, if the assembly has a seam, and cure it as long as it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any effort, for the oilmen restore it soon enough and cause pain."
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the piercing comes down to the inside of the ear towards the top part, then turn the paper over, and keep the piercing in one place with a hook on both sides; and if the paper is cut by the incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the piercing is done, pour on oil of salt water, and treat the hole of that person who has caused it as long as the patient remains sick.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	is made from the fat of the hairs that are spun into paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears come to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces at night, and sleep, and their papers get wet above them from the exirnach that opens into oil. And when you press the place between your fingers, you can feel the exirnach coming out.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	Is made from the fat of the hairs that are spun into paper above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts their eyes, and they cannot see the light of the sun because their tears come to their eyes; and because of this they lie down on their faces at night, and sleep, and their papers get wet above them from the exirnach that opens into oil. And when you press the place between your fingers, you can feel the exirnach coming out.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take then all a piece of linen between your two hands at the end, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and keep so that you do not stir in the split, lest you come to the whole spittle up to the oil, lest you stain it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the dislocation does not come out in the effort of the split, so take it up lightly with the split so that it comes out; then remove it as we have said, then soak the cloth in water and put it back on the joint, and extract from the splint.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who grind silk and put on it that moisture which is delayed. Then the cure until it is healthy. And if it comes to the base of an abscess, so the cure with ointments softening until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows in paper form contrary to nature, and becomes dry, if it damages the hairs, and brings about kinds of diseases like tears accustomed and softening of papers and albugine, as much as it is a cause of destruction of hairs; and the cure is according to 2.ij. ways: either by fire cautery all together, or by medicine water according to what it is before, or by chapister of cautery, and is done or by incision and stitching or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the sick person in your hand, then turn the paper of oil to your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; but if not, pour an needle on all 1. thread of above; and let this be taken from the margin of the paper or the hairs growing therefrom, and thread 1. thread above all the paper, and turn it with the razor; then cut in the part of the paper, cutting the hairs, taking all the great tear to the small one; then take out the thread, and put the paper a little piece of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper an outline of the face, as the shape of the mirthe, and it is necessary that the outline be according to the quantity that you see lift the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is a need that which has work do great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then cut on all 2. lines that you have signed, and begin from the great tear up to the small one; and let him be at the gap near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour the oil in one of the 2. angles of the cure, then scorch it completely; then assemble the 2. lips to a stitching of a needle on all 1. thread of fine wool, and wash the blood, and make air the surplus of the threads over the 2. sorcelings on anything sticky, if you see do this; and if not, leave the stitching and the threads up to 3 days or 4; then cure the wound without stitching with drying and binding things, because the paper revives at the touch of the wound and its gathering, but the stitching is moist (if the ancient say), and it is workings without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper of a figure who is also like the skin of myrtle, as we have told, a .iij. oncines according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take this one that comes up at small forces evenly according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take an needle where there is 1 thread, and bottle up the figure; and bottle up another thread less than the first, and join them together evenly; then raise your hand evenly, and raise all the skin on which you have signed, as we have told, then join the 2 lips of the wound with a stitch, and the incision with ointment and similar soothing bloodletting;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and there is no time that the hair of the paper are converted: so it is that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	"If it delays, if the cope hardens, then cure it as long as it is sound; and when the wound has healed, and the paper has been lifted up, and the hair will no longer grow; and this is the form of the 2.ij. dogs that you shall make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and breadth:"
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	"The ovations shall be such that you squeeze out a very fine needle, and bottle 1. (a certain number) of threads of silk that is very fine; then assemble the ends and tie them finely together, and make the length of the threads one palm's length; then order in the chase 1. (another number) of very fine silk threads quickly, and tie them to the chief with a thread; then put the disease on your chief; and be delicate with the sun so that the ovations are subtle; for it is a subtle and small ovation, then bottle the needle in all the chase next to the hair root, and make it pierce through the paper quickly while you draw it up; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and bottle that hair in the chase, if there is 1., or 2., or 3. or more; then pull your hand out so that the hair comes out completely from all the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if it is chased, treat and let the hairs grow out with it, pull the chase at all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the chase comes out from behind and you see it through the sight of oil; then if you pull the chase and the thread, and pour the oil and leave it there .ij. or .iij., until the hair hardens in its place and a chara is born there; and if the hairs are small, so accompany .i. long hairs of nature, and raise with that one that you leave, as long as they are stretched and then let them down.
de la porriture de l’oil	of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this illness, called "aleacrati" or the porrittion comes in oil, there are two ways: one is natural and the other is un-natural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a caustic, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treating this in the text is that you split that wound, and separate the lips from it, and put linen thread inside, and let it heal until it is healed; and you should not use anything in the cure of it that dries and constricts. For if you do that, the disease will come back worse than before; but use things that soften, like fenugreek; and the water or oil of rose and flax seeds are cooked, and olive oil is melted into any of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it with that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure, if you put yourself on guard so that it does not become harder according to the form that it was before; and the work that we have said above is effective only after having treated this disease, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the wood that comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease, which is called "axacrati", is natural and accidental. The accidental comes from wounds, cuts, burns, and similar things; and the path of the ovraige in it that you squeeze a needle, in which there is .i. double thread, and insert it into the wood, and let it pierce all the way to the left larmier so that the thread comes out at 1/4th of the way from the other side, then take the wood above the needle, and a large spatumile.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper comes according to this that it is good, then it is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make 1/4th cut or cost on the paper; and let the chaps of the 1/4th cuts be on the 1/4th angles of the incision that you have coped, and let the figure be as if it is the figure of a letter which has non "griesche"; then take this wood, according to the quantity that its cost is cut, from that which follows the paper, then join the 1/4th parts that are cut, and tie them with a thread of wool; then treat with the medicines that we have said above, and with tents, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cauterization, you should make a plain cut between the hairs of the paper, and according to what is written above; then stretch between the 19 ribs of a tent, as I have said; and it must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master surgeons prepare the apparatus appropriately so that they can restore the figure to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what he needs to be treated and to operate with many instruments.
dou soudement de la papiere	in order to cut the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this paper-cutting has been done in such a way that the paper above is glued with oil, and cannot be moved or performed in its natural way, then it is necessary that you insert the point of an razor between the paper and the oil, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you have reached what is in contact with the thin spatumil, which should not be too sharp or too thick, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp a spatumil that bleeds the oil; and make your incision, from which you will peel off the glued one, lightly, so that the paper returns to its natural shape; and is cured of all of it, and never uses salt water, and soft water, and vinegar; and after three days use colier and cutting things as much as he is cured.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Saiches that the nail is according to .ij. manners: it is nervous and seems like a long-lasting hard syphyl, and another which is not nervous, but seems like a white congealed moisture, that when one touches it with iron and takes care of it in order to make it pinhole-like, it cannot be done; and both of these appearances begin to spread towards the great tear, and grow little by little until they blind all the sight and all the light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is so that the patient puts his hand in water, then he opens the nails; and take the paper in your hand, then twist the nail into pinhole-like nails, and raise it up; then take an awl, and put there 1.j. hair of horse, or of mare, or of bull, and a strong thread; and double the point of the awl a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail with the whole awl, and tie the nail to a thread and raise it up, and peel off at the root of the nail that which remains after the cut is made in the usual way, and never twist the nail unless you have said so; then peel off everything that is left of the split skin, until there is only the natural skin left or the tear, so that by incision does not come to the end of the tear; and any time the nail is twisted at the edge, and on the thread, as we have said; then peel off everything that is left of the split skin, until this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And keep so that the split skin does not touch the raw cloth and tear it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil into the wound, and of colchicum made of litargite, and leave it until the next day; then cure him of what he needs until he is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot put in the needle, and the uncious cannot enter, this image of the nail from medicines is cured many times; and it is born as I have told you in the division, and if you see him covered, so do the oil work of the sick person, and take the spatumile light poc according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift up the nail slightly, and if you see that it does not thin at all and the root is pressing, then distill from your mouth in oil made of white lead and red lead and a little bit of wine, and stop the oil until the next day; then start again with the other work according to this same procedure, until it is all bone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the oil, as it has been told for the aposteme chaus, then the milk, and first cure the hot aposteme until it is healthy, then start again with the work as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the meat of the eye hurts in the oil by great harm, then suspend it in the oncine, and pour a part into it, not all at once, so that tears do not come; then distill in the red oil coliere which is made of white lead.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the horse that was born with a twinge on the eye
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	Of the horse that was born with a twinge on the eye
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is completed and all the hair is cut, then pour on the oil of seaweeds or you have distilled red oil and similar medicines that are corrosive, and put cotton cloth on top with an abomination of ointment, so that it is assuredly warm; and if it does not stay put, and the horse stands up, and you doubt about warm ointment, then leave the oil and cure the sore by soothing ointments; then return to your work until he is well, and in this way make the hair grow by using this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adapt the cure of each weak oil to the natural way; and of the accidental way, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that the members are suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	the hairs
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	and let them grow a little by degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and carefully clean the oil with a soft cloth, and do not touch the tips of the spatulums, and perform this operation at noon before the sun, and be very careful so that you only touch the voines; and when you have done this, if it is a green or red wine, distil it into the oil to corrupt what is delayed from the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to hold back all of this in that hour, then make a paste on oil of things that alleviate the pain of the hairs, and leave it for some days as long as the pain is alleviated and is assured by the pustule being warm, then begin again according to this method which is before as long as it is healthy; and that is the shape of the powers:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirrour thus named "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with fire cautery and medicine as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, then cut it open on the pustule, laying bare all the moisture within, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then this is the shape of the "aspre chief", and let it be made from a hard wood like an axe head, and let it be sharpened as a chisel, as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the bone's place of corruption, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little while as you know that corruption has been removed; and do not repeat it, then restore the place of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is tight and the heart is not broken, and the base of the bow is tight and remains so for six days, and it does not come out again and there is no abscess, and bad accidents do not happen, knowing that he is well; if not, then according to this form, you should bring back the fistula to the perforation of the nose: and this is that you uncover from the bone the second time by iron, and by medicines that dry out, and when it is uncovered take care that .i. [the iron] be in four angles, and that the string be thin up to the top so as you see it here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place on the bone with care the iron, and remove your hand from the oil .i. little, then turn it all completely until it pierces the bone and feels painful to the patient through this that the wound comes out in his nose if he keeps his hand on his nose; and then restore the place of drying medicines, as I have taught you, and when the heart is broken and hardens the bones, so goes the matter into the nose; and it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the hairs are open all over the body, and there is no disturbance to the spirit, nor any decrease in it, if you bind the sick person, then make him well, then put a compress on him made of wool, or sheepskin, or linen, or hemp, and then place oil on it. i.e., an infusion made of oak-acorn, aloe, incense, and sarcolle, and then strain the oil, and smear it on strips of cloth and bandages; and the way to do with the strips of cloth is that you squeeze the strips of cloth enough so that they are soft, and double each one three times, and then put one on top of the other according to the quantity that the hairs need; then strain them from above a hard bandage, and start again with the compresses not to hurt; then take off the compresses and leave the oil strained day and night, and if it becomes thick, you should strain it more; then take off the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see that the oil has improved, it is good; if not, then start again with the infusion, and the strips of cloth, and the bandage, and the compresses until he is well.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	When the silk thread that is used to weave the fabric is broken,
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven fabric, then open, and comes out like paper so as to see; therefore if you cover it, the work is such that you fix a needle at the root of the thread from one side to the other, and then another needle or there is a double thread from the part of the arm; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then tie one end of the double thread and fasten one part of the weave, and strain it well, then remove the needle and put oil of rose on it; and let it sit as long as the thread twists with the weave, then cure the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never does the wound get restricted by the weaving of a circle of cloth from any part as long as it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have grown long and even, pierce them with a fine needle which comes out perfectly from the oil, and draw out the moisture of the albuginous pus and clean the hairs, and remove it quickly; then extract it until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	with a fine needle
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	with a fine needle
des aigues de l’oil	hot oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the first line of the text:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	"After a short rest, and when the needle rises again, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place, remove almagda lightly by turning your hand back and forth; and then put a little of the valuable essence into the oil or water wet with oil extract and oil. Then with the healthy oil, bind the wound. We, and those who are with us, put on common brooches with plenty of extract."
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	"If almagda cannot enter the oil because it is too hard, for there are some people with very thick hair, then you must press the instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:"
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so in fact separate the conjunctive altogether, and don't be too thorough with it, but make it soft, then pour in the blood, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient .i. the sleeper coming, because he sleeps on his back in .j. dark place; and let him be free from all movement, and press light meats, and don't move his head either to the right or left, and tie him up according to his disposition until three days; then untie him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put on the bond until seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this at the time of the cure or afterwards, but it is necessary that you tie up this one, because it is necessary that the blood rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	So in fact separate the abscess, that you untie before the seventh day, and prepare it for this one who soothes an abscess; and when it is calmed down, then untie the vision and put on his face  .i. an eyelet to cover for a day, and stay in that same dark house. And then take him out of the house little by little, and turn him around; and know that no one should meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us from the Land of Yraq who told us that in our country they sometimes drink blood, from which one sucks water, but nevertheless I have never seen any such thing in my life, and I have never read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the Almagest, so that he who does not know them may see them; and they are properly made of air.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let the chief of these middles be of this subtile thing, and the behind in 3.iij. angles acute.
de la char sor le neis	of the chare soro th th nays
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	No times are born or neis chars ajostees diverse, of coi there is none who seem scorpions on the mouth; and if there is any such or it has a char enchaned of fox color, and if there is a char soft of good color. In that case of these chars which is soft, and not enchanted, it is necessary that you make sit the patient between your hands under the sun; and operate his nostrils, and pour on these chars the subtle subtile agut from one side, until you know that this char is all osseous.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostées toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisile et aigue ou vin.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	And if there is nothing left that cannot be covered, if the opening is very small of the instrument that moves lightly, so that nothing remains; and without lifting you up, or an abscess at the root, so that it is secure as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, hurry and cauterize them as soon as the swelling subsides and all the pus is drained, then pour or spray quickly and readily or wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be of silver or gold, resembling a lamp open, like a chain, and you should also hold it so that you can see it when the oil or any liquid is heated;
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease rises at the shoulder neck that is called "telul", and grows and becomes great enough so that it is seen in sight; and for this reason you must cut it at the beginning, and all the bone then, and put fire cautery or burning medicine on it; and if you delay to cover it until it is great, so take care if it is hard, of color change, poor feeling: if not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when you cover it once, a great evil comes to the patient; and the abscess is touched gently, not with iron of color change, and you see that he can be covered all, so empty the patient and cover it without fear, and cure the place with drying and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the neck has been cut and cured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	When solutions of continued use come in one of these ovraid cartilage, i profite poc, fuer than in some men. It is therefore important that when a man has a sore throat, he looks at it carefully; and then apply the 2 lips to a stitch, then cure it as long as it is healthy; and if the lips are torn on one side or the other, you must scorch all parts of their cheeks as they heal, then assemble the 2 lips to a stitch, bind them, and powder them with dragon's blood powder and incense broied; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of fort or other plaster that sticks, and leave it till it falls off, then cure it with ointment as long as it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitch is that you join the patch: or with needles, as we have said in the stitch from the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	the lips
de la char des gencives	of the teeth
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restaignans et desiccatives; et se celle char retourne aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne retourne mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.
des sordens	Here is the translation of the text:
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	"No time is wasted in trimming the hair at the top of the head, inside the mouth, between the cheeks, the hair that is ugly and sharp; and no time is lost in letting the hair turn black and yellow, and be rancid, until the disease appears at the root of the tooth; if it is necessary to hold it with your fingers, and keep it between your hands, and pluck out the teeth or the hair that appear; so that there is no delay: and in this way, you make the black and green, and the yellow and other colors, until they are completely removed; and if one tooth needs to be pulled out at first, it is good; if not, then start again the next day and keep plucking them out, until they are all gone; and know that teeth have different shapes of instruments to pluck out, according to what the work requires, for the razor that plucks out the hair between the cheeks has a different shape from that which plucks out the teeth."
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that you extract the tooth of its pain as soon as possible, for this should not be delayed; because it is a substance so moist until there is no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	And so when the patient is forced to extract, it should be certain that the tooth is loose. Often the pain of the disease disappears and he thinks that the tooth is sound, and has it extracted; but nevertheless the pain does not go away until then, for we have already tried this with these saints; and when you are certain about the loose tooth, so it should be scraped very well with a sharp scraper around the tooth; then pull it out with your two fingers or small pliers at each push and push until it is well loosened, then tighten the pliers well; and let the head of the patient in your lap between your knees, and hold him tight so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After the tooth has been extracted properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, then take any of these instruments and push it in from each side slightly, and move it as you did first. And if the root is broken and bleeding, then fill it with rags, lay or put them where they are; and if it is extracted delicately with small pliers so that it does not break when extracted, and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you do well to take care not to break it, and if a part remains, and return it to the patient by the malice of the root, which causes greater pains than the first. And you should take care not to do so as does that ignorant saint, who, through his haste and impetuousness, often breaks the tooth completely, and does not administer any of those which we have described; but brings one often by the noise of that great disease because of the roots that it delays, or because of the tooth that it breaks, as we have often wanted to do; and when the tooth has been extracted, if you wash the place with wine or mint and vinegar, and they run away from there, often coming, if you employ the place of vitriolic; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, so that the thick ones do not double up when you pull out the teeth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of strong limbs so that they do not bend on pulling, and be of good forged iron, and be toothed for holding the teeth in place.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains dry at pulling, if you put cotton wet with oil or butter on the place, until the roots are soft, then pull the teeth which are called 'algefri', from which the jaw seems a saw; and be made inside like a file and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the whole of the tool around the root, and put the instrument which is called "Althali", that is to say palainche, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be careful and strong so that it does not break, and the root comes out through this, which is good; if not, help yourself with all the tools, of which the shapes come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this tool which has .ij. rain, of which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are in front in the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument which seems a great pliers, whose form is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this instrument so that it cannot break, and know that many of the instruments from within are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and the master physicians subtlely try themselves by their own instrument, according to what his work and the disease show him, for there is a variety of diseases where the old did not teach an instrument for this; and if it does not break the carriage or other bones on which it rests, if it seeks the instruments that are right, that I have told you, and helps with gestures, so here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be strong and well holding to hold the bone, that it does not escape but can hold it and remove it; and then return it to the right place of suitable medicine for him, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, so the re-implantation of all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to nature's form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, if it comes out after the tooth, and is not in its right place, and one cannot sew or file it: then the raze; and if it is sharp with the tooth, take this instrument which I show you here, which resembles a small pick, and of iron made, inside:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap put on and on hand for the hardness of the tooth, and for what you can move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, so take a file of this size:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime where one makes needles; and in a lime poke and poke with your hands gently day after day so that it does not move until it breaks; then the smooth at the end to all razor, and its base is too rough and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to file the sharp edge until it is even, so it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loses its grip
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the tooth loses its grip, either by percussion or by biting, and the patient cannot press on what he chews, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and that does not work; if you restrain it with a gold wire, because silver wire turns green and pales, but gold wire never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any loose teeth, then take the thread and double it between the 10 sound teeth, then put the threads between the loose teeth, if there are more than 10, until you have tightly covered all the teeth on one side; then gently and carefully tighten your grasp, until it no longer moves; and if it comes loose, or if the thread breaks, then restrain it with another wire. If it stays put and serves its purpose for a long time, and this is the form of the teeth and the shape of the adjustment of the 10 sound teeth and the 10 loose ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and if the tooth comes loose, then put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not mix in who are not skilled and patient, and never make the shape of a tooth out of whale bone, and put it back in its place where it has come loose, and tighten it up as we have said, and let it stay and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to copper the link of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	To copper the link of the tongue: De coper lou liien de la lengue.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it turn black or green or hard, then don't let the patient feel it or touch it, because that is a wart; and if it declines towards blotchiness, and there is moisture, then pour the onyx, and make a fine fent with a spatumil, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if he doesn't go away to your ovraige, then put vitriole broiet onto it as long as it is stained, and then come back to your ovraige as much as you carry it; then lift up the leu of aysel and seile, and cure him with other cures until he is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	No words in this text have been translated. Please provide the next line for translation.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman with an abscess in her throat, which is to say, a small-sized abscess; and she had almost completely closed up her whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had stayed like this for another day or two. The abscesses were raised up so high that they had almost completely blocked the throat. I then hurried, and inserted one of my fingers into her throat, and pushed it further in, and there was a great deal of pus; afterwards I removed my finger from the abscess, and poured some of it out, and there was only a little bit of blood left; and thus the passage in her throat was unblocked for this woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting at that abscess for a long time; and those abscesses healed back together, and filled up the space that I had emptied out, so that they were almost completely blocked again; then I cauterized them inside her throat: thus her condition did not improve; and I left these parts, and there was nothing but God's will about them after me.
de l’uve	of the wine
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	de l'eau
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the chief take a braid of hair whereon to put the medicine, as the braids of a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine over the uvula; and let the patient lie down on his side so that saliva and spittle run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and wound; then hold your hand to all the medicine and press it on the uvula, the quantity of half an hour, until you see him calm and the taste of the medicine is lessened; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument full of cotton into the chin above, until the cotton hardens on the uvula; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and clean after  .iiij. days or .v.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incising, only the cauterization; if it is treated with smoking in this way, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and averronne and similar herbs, and put them all or any of them into  .i. pot, and pour water on them so, and let the pot be very tight with strong clay, and immerse the instrument in the pot according to this way:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And let it be of silver or gold, and let one of the shoulders be boiled in the pot with water until the steam rises to the uvula through the chin, as much as the uvula is numb; then apply this often, so that the uvula dries out, and guard against doing this at the beginning of the advent of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this except at the decline of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a chin and put a hook of hair into it, so that the mouth of the patient does not get too hot; for the hook of hair does not make the steam heavy in the mouth, and this is good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Maintes fois s'aert à la gorge os ou épine de poisson, ou aucune chose ; si convient donc que tu traies ce que tu peux voir, et li presse la langue au soleil à tout l'instrument, si que tu vois mues la chose ; et ceu que ne t'apert mie et est réponus en la gorge, convient que tu faisses vomir le malade ainsi que la viande soit cuite en l'estomac ; par aventure si istre li chose aerse par le vomissement ; ou li malade engloutisse une pièce d'éponge, ou une pièce de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morцел de pain sec ; et lie à l'éponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse ; et quant elle viendra au leu, si s'aérera, et puis trairas furieusement ; et s'elle ne vient furieusement de ce que nos avons dit, si prends .i. instrument de plonc selon ceste forme :
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Mouthwashes of salt water or wine are often effective for removing fish bones or other objects from the throat. Therefore, take this instrument and bend it at the tip so that it can more easily enter the mouth, and lift the top lip; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, which would prevent all flow, nor should you press inwards with force; and test whether the patient swallows the instrument, as it will indicate whether anything is stuck or not; if he swallows it, pour water down his throat, or make him spit it out, or both. And if he spits it out, hold the instrument against his throat at an angle so that he can't swallow it again, and then make him spit it out forcibly. And if he doesn't spit it out as described above, take this same instrument and wipe clean his nose with it; and then make him spit it out; for often objects become stuck in the nostrils.
de la sansue de la gorge	Mouthwashes of salt water or wine are often effective for removing fish bones or other objects from the throat. Therefore, take this instrument and bend it at the tip so that it can more easily enter the mouth, and lift the top lip; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, which would prevent all flow, nor should you press inwards with force; and test whether the patient swallows the instrument, as it will indicate whether anything is stuck or not; if he swallows it, pour water down his throat, or make him spit it out, or both. And if he spits it out, hold the instrument against his throat at an angle so that he can' t swallow it again, and then make him spit it out forcibly. And if he doesn't spit it out as described above, take this same instrument and wipe clean his nose with it; and then make him spit it out; for often objects become stuck in the nostrils.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is better than bloodletting, as I said in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look at the mouth of the sick person towards the sun, so that you press the tongue to the instrument which I have told you. And if you see the blood, take a little pin, or small scissors, which are worth for him. And if he is not worth, take a dog's tooth, and put it in the mouth of the sick, then pour out or suck up the blood with the tooth; and do this often. And if the sick person is very pale all day, then take full a pitcher of cold water, and open the mouth, and let him drink, and move his hand frequently; and as soon as the blood feels the cold, spit it.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not spit as we have said, then sublimate the sick person with ashwood, at the instrument which I have told you in the fumes of the oven; do this many times, for she will not tarry. And the way of the fumes is that you squeeze a pot in which there are charcoal vis, and put the cover on it so that it covers the middle, and in the hole is the head of the instrument; then pour out your fumes, and let the sick person put the tip of the tube in his mouth, and close his mouth, so that the fumes do not go out, but come to the blood; and the blood will come now, and if it does not spit, then begin again the fumes many times; and suffer the sick person to be thirsty, and drink salty and bitter things, and not water; and then let him ease his duty which he has done by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument has regard to how the blood is drawn out, if one can see it, seems like scissors bent for going into the throat; and has a similarity to the beak of a plier, and has sharpness of lime, so that whatever he takes, he cannot leave; and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapisters of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	The chapisters of the abscesses are, according to what this reminder comes from a and b in this book, and are divided into perforation and incision; and it is in 2 manners which one is in his semblance middle, and of that which it holds moisture. And the second manner if it is because of the leus where they are at the body. Because the abscess of the head is other than that of the fundament, and the abscess of the charnuted leu is others that that comes in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if for the abscesses it is not necessary to pierce, as long as the bow is dead according to its completion; and if for such that it is necessary to pierce when they are crut, and do not die according to their completion, as well as the abscess which comes from delicate joints. Because when the abscess comes from delicate joints, and we leave it until it is rotten within, by chance if the bond and the nerve of the joint are corrumput, therefore this is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is from the principal limb, and you delay the perforation so long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is from the fundament, if you pierce him thus that he dies without digestion complete, so that the one who is from the fundament, may not be rotten perfectly, and be alongied within, and come to fistula; and cannot heal in great term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the time of the perforation of the abscess which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed down, and the departure of the fever, and the decrease of the pain and redness, and the debasement and the sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation where there is more dependent leu of the abscess, and at the place where it opens; and let the perforation be long in the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all the leus equally where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In cases where it is swollen, follow the direction of the affected member. And when abscesses are in their natural state, so that you leave the perforation until it has been completely digested, as we have said. For if you pierce them before this, if you lengthen the course of their venoms, they will be full of filth; and perhaps their lips will harden and their insides will dry out. And if any abscesses are pierced according to the width of the affected member, according to what the members require. And it is necessary that you bring small abscesses, small ruptures; and in large abscesses, large ruptures, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that it is necessary to cover them, and bind them; when they have become as soft as cloth, it is necessary to do the same with them as one does with boils: and if there are such that they are cut in two angles, and if there are any that one covers like the skin of a myrtle, as we said for abscesses of the arms; and if there are any that one cuts into a round shape, and other shapes and appears to be covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those who have no hair, if it is a superficial abscess, you should pierce it plainly; and when the abscess is large, and has a hard boil, and you pierce it, if you do not draw out all of the boil at once, but only a part, then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out another part; do this again and again in great pain, until the whole boil is drawn out. But be careful, for if the patient is of feeble virtue, or a woman, or small children, or old men with weak limbs, the wound may kill the patient, and you will not know it. Therefore, use this ointment with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, if the wound heals, and look that the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a simple laceration, put linen or old cotton over it; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many ruptures, you should pierce each one with a tent so that they touch each other; and if you have covered part of the skin in the abscess with thread, and have tied it tightly, you should fill it with old cotton or linseed oil, and bind it until the third day; then wash it, and apply ointment as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient is bleeding from the wound, you should apply cold water and quickly, and moisten 1. drapel (a cloth) and put it on the bleeding place many times. And if the bleeding persists, you should use government and cure, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is a deep abscess, and the skin is nervous, you should cover it with tents and drapes soaked in wine and oil warm; and if it is in the ear, and the skin is tender, you should cover it with drapes soaked in water and oil, or in wine and oil that is cold, until the third day, as we have said; then wash the abscess and clean it and cure it, as it should be, until it is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is what it means:
des soros	abscesses
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Here is the translation:
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And this is what it means:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Of the scrofula Many times have they placed an abscess on the neck, and released the veins, and caused anger, and never come to another part or cors, and are rotten, and are entangled with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its rib, just as the knot and the abscess at the back of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health. Now, when you see one that is of good disposition in the shoulder, and its color seems to be that of the body, and silent from both sides and does not sink, if it comes that you cut it from above, and scorch each part, and the iij. lips of the neck with one hand, if you need them, just as we have said concerning the abscess at the back of the head; and the tree little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and is not too deep, lest you should cut the spine or the shoulder blade, and the hand does not escape, and look too far forward, lest you should cut it too much.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	If you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then in the wound vitriol powder, or some powders that stop blood, and draw out the wound; and leave the wound until the abscess is calm, and the wound is softened, and you begin to rot. And when the sore is healed, if there are no small scrophulas at your index, if you cut them and wash them away. And if it has in the root of the scrofula a large vein, then it does not come that you cut that scrofula in its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang by it, without doing any harm; then employ the wound with dried cotton dipped in Egyptian balm, and then dress it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you cut the whole scrofula, then it comes that you gather the iij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, and there should be no delay in sewing because of the size of the scrofula. If it is necessary to sew the root of it, and draw it out strongly, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold excess fluid, pierce where it opens; and pierce thus com those before mentioned, hanging up, then add tentes with oignment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well washed, then dress it with oignement in hanging.
de squinance	de squinance
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	the ancient ones spoke of the scarification of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is the scriptural word from their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinance, it is necessary that the fending of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be removed; and no one should do this for anyone, since all the veins and the base of the malady are at those who have an abscess warm in the mouth or in the throat or in .ij. amandres.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the base, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte so that the stranglehold which comes from the obstruction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is then necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we do so with a length of 1.5 inches or a small cut across it, between the two circles, or by the quantity of the cut made by the saw, not in the cartilage; and these are appropriate to the cutting of the epiglottis so that there is no need for a tool, and the blade is long enough to cut through it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the leather of the throat to its full length, and then splits the meat as far as it comes to the larynx; and avoid the cuts in the flesh, if you see nothing there, and then cut the saw, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and is proven by the splitting of the larynx's membrane that jumps in the place where it has been broken, and by the absence of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed where one doubts strangulation, close the lips of the wound from both sides, and the whole cartilage below the skin; then administer medicines that promote healing, until he is well.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albuças says: “Don't do this before the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the deficiency causes his death.”
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Therefore, cover the epiglottis so that the patient does not breathe through the wound, and thus be preserved from death; and
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and so the elder is instructed to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in 1 or 2 days
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and so they are instructed to stitch up the wound and heal, until it is healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a young lady take a knife and put it in her throat, and she ran to the chapel by the pond.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found her as well dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood that had issued from it, and I could see that she had not bled from a vein but rather from her throat, and her veins were running with blood through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and I healed it as well as I could;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and the girl was only red in her cheeks, and she returned to her usual self;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I know that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	is called "gorge hernia", and is a great hernia in the color of a yellow, and is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it has according to two ways: natural, and accidental; where the natural does not have any reason.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And these accidents occur according to two ways, of which one is similar to fat in us, and the other way is similar to an abscess which comes from us by means of arteries.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and it has fear, and does not come to operate fire on anything but in that which is small, and tries and searches into all the inside.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it like this also that is fat in us, and has no power at all if the head is cut off, so as to be able to treat the whole body, if there is any left.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everything, and cure it as it should be done, until it is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of doing this, all of which I will describe.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is fitting that I make the whole difference between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is harsh and fiery, until the boiling has passed, and it is complete; then rest the fire and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With no heat or fever or pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is his own sack and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins also like a jelly, and grows fat.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and are according to their appearances, or greasy, or moist, and all colors are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the noise, you should first test and question all the instruments called "entromessoire", according to what their form will be or the paste that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of testing an abscess is that you squeeze or more moistly place your hand on the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the instrument has penetrated to the core, then let go. And let go when it hurts, because if the instrument goes deeper into the abscess, there will be less pain:  Et si tu viens a la cure dou nout, et que tu viens a l’inquisicion des apostemes, il covient que tu esprueves li nout en deux partes;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then take out the extruder, and take care not to jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture is running fast, that it be colored, if you cut it as I have said of other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the extruder there is no moisture, you shall know that it is fat, if you cut it in a crosswise fashion and pick it up with tweezers, and scorch it lightly on each side, and guard the seed or grain where it lies so that you take it whole;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot take it whole, take it in pieces so that nothing remains in place.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if I do not delay, he returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it takes a little time, and does not grieve you, then take the wound with some corrosive water, extract the wound, and put on something soothing to the sore, and treat with other remedies until he is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if we give him great care, then let us cut the .ij. lips of the wound, and treat what causes it;
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the wound is opposite or another place, then let us employ the place of vitriole, and leave it there 2 or 3 days, as long as the wound hurts, and return to what was delayed;
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the lines of the text translated into English:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	"And they are also like the needles with which sorceresses are sewn, and they are of yellow bronze, or iron, or silver, and those that are black are more proven to stick into the knuckles of fistula."
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	"And they are of 3 ways: great, mean, and small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations."
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	"The forms of the needles are of many appearances, so that you see here: great, mean, and small; and if there are needles which have 3 quarters of 3 ways also; "
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if they have once two scabs, and are also of three ways; and if they have once one scab, and once a scabbard only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	And if they have once three scabs, and are also of three ways; and if they have once one scab, and once a scabbard only, and are of three ways; and all these are necessary in their place. The chief of these things to do are sharp, and of such I have who cut but on one side, whereon we scratch so that the vein or nerve is not копе;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	And of these intermissions are the alems replied in many, so that the patient does not lose them at the opening of the abscesses; and also
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and are of three ways: great, small, and mean, as you see; and
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use any but a sharp knife that is well-sharpened, for the same reason as legs, arms, breasts, hands and fingers, and similar parts;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and never use anything else but a sharp knife that is well-sharpened, according to this form, in order to stop bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and never place it at the opening of a vein or artery, or according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	and never stretch the nipples of certain men when they become corrupted, as much as they resemble a woman's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and grow slow and fat, and who are to be cured, if it is necessary according to this form of this line b until: .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then peel the fat, and treat the wound with ointment by washing, then stitch together the 19 lips of the wound, and heal as long as it is well;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	And let him drink clear water, and soften it with his own saliva as much as it will take, and make 19 holes in it above, by 19 similar cuts;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of which one is held to the other at the end of the one and the other, so that the longest line contains the shortest according to this form, from the line b until the line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then burn the skin that is between the 17th and 18th lips, and remove the fat, and I will add what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary for the cure, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or for the removal of blood, then you must fill the wound with wet cotton wadding with a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it has drained the remaining blood and fat, and then clean it thoroughly until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	the abscesses of the elbows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The scrofulous lumps that come out of the sores are hard or have ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	These that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b until line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are emptied, if you employ a piece of old cotton cloth and leave it there for another day, then take out all the cotton, and treat with ointment as soon as it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, then treat it in the same way as we have described for treating scrofula wounds, and if there is an abscess inside, then apply fire cautery as we have described.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is broken and the skin above it is tight, so often comes the abscess and also it goes to the escaped vein and abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows how it is for the artery, then is the abscess long enough to be completely healed;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it on both sides, if you feel stretching; and when it is for the vein, if you feel pain suddenly;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is madness to cut this anus, and most of all when it is dislocated the hips and at the neck and mouth of others, and it is very big.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	So then the treatment of iron is to be avoided, and that which is at the top also needs to be avoided, and in that which swells with an artery, pierce through the skin from above.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work on the waist as a single piece, and separate the artery from the tissue very carefully, until it is completely uncovered;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then put an awl through it and draw it out to the other side of the flesh, stretching the artery into a double loop of 12 inches long, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries which are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	and then set the joint that is between the .ij. links of an intramuscular injection as long as there is no leak there, and loosen the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	and then apply the cure in the form of a bowstring, as long as the link creaks;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then treat with an ointment that comes from a plant, as long as it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, so that you can hold it with your hand at the place where you put the ointment on all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	Then pour the alcohol into the vessel that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and it has .i. a double thread so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	Then cut the abscess, as I told you, or thread of one of the two ends to the two threads;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then another needle is put on all of .i. thread to the incision of the first needle, and the threads are pulled in .iiij. leu;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	Then cut the abscess as much as possible, then cut the superfluity of the incision and leave what is tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then wrap it with .i. rags wet in wine and oil, then bring him the cures of tent-fabric and herbs until he is well.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, when they come from the artery and the vein, they come to the nerves when they are bruised, or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this often happens with the shoulders and arms and in all joints, and its color seems like the color of the body, and it is in many conditions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when they are restrained, if the patient feels pain, and is not completely healed, but wait for the cure;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and mute well all around, and does not move forward or backward, nor up nor down, and the one who is in joints does not come to cover with iron: perhaps it will come contract;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are at the head or at the front, make the skin to the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the appendages are small, if it has a nail, and cut it in its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is great, if the hangnail has been torn and the skin has peeled off, then break the bone and join the wound together with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	big holes hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	No time at all comes to the belly and nowhere else does it hurt, and it is called "fungus" because of its appearance, and its root is subtle and its stem large; and there are small ones and very big ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw.I. a home who had .ij. belly that were more like fungi than any other thing, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were split open, and ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I found these two weights, one weighing .xviij. oz., and the other  .vj. Z., and in the work of incising so that you see the patient is moist, and the color of the arterioles is pale and moist with a fine root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if the cut is wide, and may be in your presence the fire cautery. For the barber often causes too great a loss of blood, and he goes away without you, so hurry then to cauterize him;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient becoming pale and fearful because of the iron incision, then take a well-made piece of string, bind the arteriole as we have said, and leave it for .ij. days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to bind the string around the arteriole until it has healed over, and probe through it; and if the roots are large, then have them cut off by themselves for the sake of the belly, but you must cut them well on one side;
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize it so that it does not return; then cure the wound, and keep you from covering the tumor which is of bright color and poor feeling and of rancid milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an infected abscess, and I will come to the treatment of cancer hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound is well
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	as well as the appearance of the wound coming by cauterizing the wound or incision of syphilis, and is on the belly and has some of the bouez, so as it happens in other injuries, or of blood which cuts veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windity;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to the rupture of the syphous and the outlet of the bile, then the color of the abscess is like the color of the chest, and it is a light thing without pain, and an opening of various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the outlet of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when it is pressed toward its two ends it returns and goes back again, and by chance if it is stretched, and expands much at the entrance to the bath and for great work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, without restraint; and if it is due to blood, then opens by these signs, the large and hard abscess, and is placed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is due to wind, then it is hot at the tip, and the work of opening is that you look at its appearance; it is due to blood, then it opens by the artery, or vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	If it is necessary that you leave the wound open. For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before, when applying the chapter to the abscesses, for the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is for the intestine or the bowels, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to lie down, and be completely still, then sign around the entire abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then have him move his feet together;
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the place that you have signed with your foot;
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	And then, put half of the ointment on top to all of the large hook.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	Then tie him with a strong thread or rope of strong silk tightly, and we bind him thus;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	Then spread half of the ointment over the thread, and dip your index finger in it, and feel the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	If you find that he is caught on the thread, and if he comes loose, apply ointment to the outside of the gut.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it by the edge, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery is against him or he bleeds a lot, then return to your work and take 10 needles, and bind them together with 10 threads, and bind the needles around what you have just pierced that you made pierce in the shape of a cross.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then stretch the abscess over the needles, and if you see anything, cut off the needles, and let it rest in its place until it rot, and bury it by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut when it is soft and rotten, then treat what it touches, and shave the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and remove the blood where you find moisture, then heal the wound from what it touches, and bond it.
dou chancre	and the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have spoken in the division of the appearances of cancer, and how it should be operated on with medicines, and how one should cauterize its wound; and we say that cancer is contracted in the leg or foot, and great caution must be taken in its treatment, and the old man says that when cancer is in a limb or toe, as a cancer that is in mamelles, and in cuisses, and in similar places, it should all be cut off when it is in an early stage; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I have never known anyone to be cured of it; nor has anyone ever been cured of it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the obviations, when it is in a leg or foot where it can be cut off, as we have said, is that you never purge the black bile; then make it healthy if it has manifest repletion, then afaite the bile.i. good ground for doing the obviation; then throw your scabs or cancer, and your hair from all sides, and the bone from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and press hard at your hand or at any object, and if it opposes the incision of the artery or vein, if it cauterizes until the blood is staunched; then cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisia
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	Of hydropisia We have already said in the division the appearances of hydropisia, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each appearance, and the cure that is made with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: there is no need to touch iron in these 2. appearances; namely, tympanites and hyposarche, for it is a deadly thing; so when you treat this appearance of hydropisia called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not benefit, if you see the patient is weak, or he has another disease than hydropisia, such as stomach trouble and similar things; then do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient of very good health, and he has only hydropisia and is neither too young nor too old, then do it thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Give the patient a good deal of fire on your hands, and the assistant tightly presses the belly at its lowest part with the pis, then take the spatumile with thorns according to this form: And be they cut into 2 parts from the point, and nevertheless do not let it be so deep that it can come up to the intestine when it is put in, and cannot be hurt;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look to see if the hydropisia is deposited along the intestines: it must be that you cut it from above down on the hand; and if the hydropisia is due to liver disease, then your cut should be on the left side of the belly; and if it is due to bilge, then it should be on the right, and it is necessary that the patient lie on his back so that the superfluity does not run into the weak part;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	And the root of the nose is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the water, let it drop now on the instrument; empty half or a third part, for if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient will die because of the resolution of his spirit from the wound, or he will faint, or come close to death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But empty according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the disease and its pulses mean; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the pulse which stops at the medicine, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this way; then begin again the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering this, and treat with a little quantity of water:
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do not make it a daily habit, and guard against overindulgence until there is only a little moisture. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you let too much water come in, if it is cured with dry earth or sand, and perspiration or bathing, and sunning; and if it turns to drinking, then cure it with drying medicines until it is well, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I said above.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the cessation of ejaculation
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Do not make it a daily habit, and guard against overindulgence until there is only a little moisture. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you let too much water come in, if it is cured with dry earth or sand, and perspiration or bathing, and sunning; and if it turns to drinking, then cure it with drying medicines until it is well, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I said above.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Do not make it a daily habit, and guard against overindulgence until there is only a little moisture. And if you are in doubt about the patient, and you let too much water come in, if it is cured with dry earth or sand, and perspiration or bathing, and sunning; and if it turns to drinking, then cure it with drying medicines until it is well, and cauterize the stomach and liver and spleen after extraction of the water, as I said above.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method for opening is that the patient lies down on his back; then the head of the penis and the scrotum are cut in length, like the width of a feather, so that the tip enters the middle, as it should; and you must not let the blood come out, which comes out many times, and if it comes out, stop the flow of blood with the hand that stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	many times come bilious fluid in the penis, and it is an appearance of a ugly thing; and there are evil and non-evil ones; it is necessary that you squeeze them with one hundredth of a pound of fine salt, and clean them with diafinicon until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the fluid is malicious, of green color and foul-smelling, it is necessary that you apply fire to it. When you have cut it, and the fluid is in the penis, and there is some inside the skin and some outside, it is necessary that you take out the fluid that is inside first; and when it has hardened, if it is not secure at the base of the penis, it may come out black and corrupted, so it is necessary to cut off all that is black and corrupted, then cover it with plaster made of honey and flour which is made from the skin of pomegranates and dates, then cure it with other cures until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	Et s'il est enflé par la fièvre, si on lui applique le cautère lunaire selon cette forme : les cautères aident aux .i. dispositions ensemble : c'est-à-dire, au départ de la fièvre et à sa corruption ; et si le prépuce de la verge est corrompu et rétréci, si il convient que tu enfonces ou conduises dans la verge une chaîne de pierre, et qu'il urine le malade entre ; et quand le poil est arraché au bout de la verge qui arrive à ceux qui n'ont jamais été circoncis, ou s'il y a plaie ou abcès, il convient donc que tu l'escorches avec un instrument cheveu, tant que les liens soient désolidarisés, et que le prépuce de la verge soit libéré de tous côtés ;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is swollen by fever, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form: the cauterizations help to the .i. dispositions together: that is to say, at the start of the fever and its corruption; and if the foreskin of the penis is corroded and retracted, if it is convenient that you push or lead into the penis a chain of stone, and let the sick urinate between them; and when the hair is ripped off at the tip of the penis that comes to those who have never been circumcised, or if there is an ulcer or abscess, then it is convenient that you scorch it with a hair instrument, until the ties are dislodged, and the foreskin of the penis is freed from all sides;
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an obstacle to continuing the treatment if it is like the other wounds; nevertheless, when we carry out this operation by our will, and especially on children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak about circumcision for their children, because they did not use it in their laws, and we only have what we acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the most part of the masters and the wise ones who made circumcision in the foreskin, and with force, and all a novel; and perhaps if one should cover that above and hold that below, it would be difficult.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the foreskin covers it again, and the pain is doubled, and there is no assurance of the cleaning that comes from the flesh; and because of the nail, sometimes the knife slips, and ruins the work, and often there is no need of cleaning, and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the cleaning that is performed with all the thread of a string, I found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you squeeze your hand, cut it evenly into two pieces; but the thread should be well-twisted around the hide; and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if he hears, that you are making the thread tie itself tightly around the staff so much, and then let it go in all ways that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and then let it rest in your hands straight, and pull the forces between your hands or toes that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the staff and blow or breathe, and turn it upside down as much as the head of the staff is attached; then clean it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the leather knot with a double thread, then tie it again with another thread; and hold it between the 2 strings, then cut off the ends with the knife in an orderly manner, and turn the chief of the staff upside down.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it run a little and a little, for this is the mud; and put powder on top and top of the powder  .i. drapelet is glued with a mousef of baked egg white mixed with rose water, confited with good oil and fresh herbs, and leave it until the other day, and cure with another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for purification is thus: both shoulders should be soft and cut, and the shoulders also should be long and even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of purification is when the cut runs from the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so that the edges form an abscess; and the kop [a term for a body part] evenly, and if you cannot hold it in your nail, then hold it with pincers, and then let it go.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it goes beyond three days, and that which is in the root of the penis is swollen, if you leave it until the abscess has dried up, and burn it lightly; if the kop [a term for a body part] can be moved, and you protect the part from the root of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then the powder of things that have a sour wound, which we have mentioned in the treatment of powders, and if it goes up too much, and it hurts, if it does not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	Here is the first sentence translated:
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	Here is the translated text:
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	Here is the translated text:
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Here is the translated text:
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take .i. a double thread, and tie at the head .i. a little piece of wool or cotton, and bottle up the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and the bottle it up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and linseed oil, and set the patient on a chair, and raise the bladder and the penis with moistened oil and olive oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	and then lightly pour the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, and then double the penis above the bladder, then bottle up the syringe before jusc’to the bladder, and let the patient go to the empty thing, and if it is not done according to this order but that he who leads him or she goes there is twisted; then take all the thread out of the little piece of wool and more, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully, and make the urine run.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and restart the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relaxed.
des maladies de la vessie	For diseases of the bladder:
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scabies or itch comes into the bladder, where it is gathered together, and you see that it distils water and medicine, then do this with all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its shape:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has .ii. perforations: .iij. from one side, and .i. from the other, as you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine can stop well the penis without addition, if it may be drawn out moisture, and put on when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	And when you see that your medicines go into the bladder, put the chief of the cup in the moisture, and draw while carrying it, which will draw the moisture to the cup, and then rebounce it strongly on the carrying one; if it will enter the moisture, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	And this is the shape of the subtle cloth in which the bladder is rinsed: if it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or brass, and this is the head higher up; and desoz to 1 . i . breast or liiens; then take a bladder of sheep and put in the moisture that you saw clisterize the bladder, then tie between the 1 . i . breasts form of a good double thread, and heat 1 . i . cup this moisture on the fire; then bottle the head with clistere to the penis, and strain your hand over the bladder all the moisture coming forward, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder;
de la piere	And from stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said in the division the manner of cutting stones, and extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone cut to rain, and all the signs, and in what stone one must act upon; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is cut in the bladder often comes out with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder resembling water in its subtleness; and I open it, and I massage the patient's penis, and I rub it many times, and then it hardens; and because of these jumps, the foundations are lost; and the healing of the children is lighter until they are 24 years old, and it is very heavy in the old, and it is painful in those who are between middle age and old age; and the cure is more light for those who have the great stone than for those who have the small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, if one first purifies the patient with enema, in order to extract all the contents which is in the intestines. For it does not bother him at any time to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and bring him to the fire at a medium heat; so that the stone falls into the bladder from above, and does not come out again; then let him sit between your hands, and his legs between your knees, so that the bladder is all turned towards you; then question it and touch it.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in space, then hurry now to trim on top of the stone. And if it does not stick to touch all, then moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand, then the disease is serious, or your two middle ones; and pour into its foundation, and seek the stone, and when you feel it on your two, if the moans in the neck of the bladder; then press your two, and pour at the back where you see cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And order the minister to press the bladder in his hand, and order him that he extends to his right hand the testicles up, and with his left hand lift the skin that is below the testicles in the part where one cuts; then pour the spermatic cord, from which it takes its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side; and be right on top of the stone, and your two are attached to the foundation, and the cut from top to bottom so that it is wide at the back, and tight inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big:
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	So that the press if your two that is at the foundation, so that they do not work; and know that there is part of the stone where it is angles, and edges: it is greased to come out; and if it is round in front, similar to a globular shape, and rounded, its exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s'elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu'elle n'eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l'estrainche de vitriole;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	So if there is only one stone, then tap it first at the base of the bladder, and then cut deeper, and then trim it with a sharp tool. And if there are more than one stone, then first tap the largest one at the base of the bladder, and then cut deeper, and then trim it with a sharp tool. For in two things the patient dies: either his urine comes out quickly because the opening cannot be closed, or else he does not urinate at all; but you should nevertheless try to extract it with tweezers, or break it into pieces, as long as you do so little by little.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have finished your work, anoint the wound with balm and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it up, and put thereon a damp cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then untie the bond from the patient's neck, and do not remove it until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have dislocated it, so well raise its oil and water, then cure it with the ointment of the dead and the ointment of basil, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and frost of blood in the bladder, and is held back by this, which comes out in a certain way that without jumping with urine: then you must put it in the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and pour it out.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then raise the wound with water and salt and straw, and aid it in all ways that you can until it is healthy; and it comes that all the hours that you cure it, that you bind the legs, and put the medicine on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it lies in the tube of the urinary bladder, and is pushed out, and the urine cannot come out; then cure it by this that I have said above, that you cut it many times; I have already tried this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take .i. piece of iron according to this form and make it at .iij. angles with .i. twig:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take 1/2 a twig and stick it up the tube, so that it does not come out at the bladder end; then press the bit stuck up in the tube a little, until it comes to the stone; then make a hole in the stone with the stick little by little until you can see urine coming out on the other side; then quickly let the urine go and the patient will be better.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you cannot do this in any other way to stop the patient's pain, then take 1/2 a twig and stick it up the tube, and another one upside down on top of it, and pass the bit stuck up in the tube between the two lines, then pull it out hard, and clean out the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is well.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	So be it that a woman is pregnant in women, and if there is any, the cure is grief, and is defended by .iij. things: the one is that per adventure the woman is virgin; and the second is c’on cannot find a woman well knowing who disdains to show himself to mirth, even when she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that per adventure one cannot find a woman well knowing in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the child of the woman is more perfect than the child of the man, because it is necessary to make a deeper cut, and there is much fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to go out, then command a wise woman, and do not cut her off, and if you do not get her, do not look for 1.1. cast mirth; and the present a skilled woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her that she make the one that you command in the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well if the woman is virgin: then it is necessary to put his right hand or foundation and seek the stone; and if she trueves, then she binds her right hand, and recommends that she put her right hand or with the pain of the malady, and wants and presses her left hand on the vessel formed.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she pees, then it is necessary that she move from the bladder's entrance until the pubic bone's root gradually, so that she arrives at the leg's root; then cut into the stone in the root of the thigh against the middle where the tool is placed, and feel the stone on that part; and do not move her legs above the stone or behind, and make the incision first small.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	Then pour the cut in the waist, if you feel the stone so high that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and with furrows. If you know these appearances, then know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if it comes out, then put vinegar on the wound, and keep it for an hour until the wound is well-healed; then return to your work, as long as the stone has come out, and have tools to help you in this work, which I told you about in the extraction of the stone from men.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if it comes out, and this is the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the wound and drain it with a cup and a bowl, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone and do not pull it out, except by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided, and the veins have closed, return to your work, as long as the stone remains firm.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	of hernia carnous
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this water is of such a weakness that it comes to the testicles, and is spread out this material.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And there is no time when it comes to striking against the joints, and this moisture comes in many colors: or this color declines to yellow, or this is not red, or black, or aqueous white, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognition of this assembly, because if it is or white so that we have said, then the abscesses are red, i.e., short, but do not open the joints, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper towel, then the abscesses are red with part of the oaf, and for this reason one thinks that it is another oaf;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the leather of the joints and the white so that it smells good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, try it on all the body parts, because its shape is ahead.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Then comes those who come after the introducers, judge those within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure them with fire, it is necessary that the patient be made well according to his strength and the replenishment of his body; then let him lie on his back on a high thing, and put about him many blankets.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then let him sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on his right, and extend the probe to one of the two ribs at the bottom of the chest;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the probe-leather, and curl it among the ribs at the bottom of the chest up to the knuckle, and cut the leather of the ribs straight with a cut, splitting it as far as the white line, and scorch it carefully according to strength;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the skin of the loin with a large sharp needle, and drain all the blood, and then put your knife on it, and keep the skin up; and do not touch the core of the meat, but only pierce the skin; cut out all or pieces separately by its thin part, so that if you do not cut it well, the blood will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood rises to your work, then put it back in its place when you have finished working on the skin; and join together the 21 pieces of meat from the core with a seam, and heal it as you would other wounds, until it is well.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the blood is corrupted by another disease, then you must hang the vials [containing the blood] in doubt of the decay of blood; and cut out the core with all the vial, and drain the blood, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the blood is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches; so cut the other part in the same way as you did the first, and wash the blood, and put it on another wound wet with rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and dip another piece of wool in wine and oil, and place it on the .ij. folds, and put double sheets over it, and wrap it up tightly according to this form:
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take 2 sheets, and fill them with wool according to this shape, and join them together by sewing around the crotch of the breeches, and let one shoulder hang down to the back, and the other to the part of the elbow; and the second head on the 2 shoulders, and all are joined together in a loop at the waist of the breeches;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and never is medicine this fire cautery in the place of a iron size, and is that you press 1 cautery with a thin knife, and scrape the leather of the folds, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white syph that contains the water is uncovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	then take this fire cautery according to this form, and pierce those syphs once, and scorch them with this thin cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And the cauldron in all ways that you can, until you are exhausted; and beware that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and move away from the bloodshed of the wound, and be careful about the cutting of the limbs.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing opposes it, or an abscess or bloodshed or anything else, so heal what opposes you, according to the one who is before said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	and if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this treatment because of its horror, so cause an incision, as I told you, and it is that when you are sure by the meanings that we have said that the ramose water is present,
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	then let the patient sit on .i. seat lifted; then pierce the abscess in the part of the nose at all the broad spatumile, and place the incision of long the neck; and be wide the perforation, so that all the water runs away;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the place, and bandage it, and let run the remainder of the water, then heal it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And let the white cloth not let the water run out of the wound's mouth, so that you put a feather or an instrument that treats the water of the dropsy into it, which has such form as above; and enlarge .i. p. the wound, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after 1v. months or more, and when it is gathered as before, and so the disease passes from the patient his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this chapter on pain there are many states, for which it seems to me that one must be careful.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the horns and most often from the joints; and this is due to moisture.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known that by excess sour water and bitter water, which is spread in the joints or by impact; or
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and the color of the abscess according to the color of the horn; and it does not feel pain, and is an abscess of grief; or
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and there is a white and sharp abscess with a fever, and never comes out of the artery, or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is an artery, if it is known by the position of the abscess, when you press it with your two hands;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and only touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	When it is done by swelling of the vein, it is known by its position on the touch of the two hands;
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can do well to make a cut on this image, and on the other images;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and that you cut off the tips of the claws, then put the claw on high, and make it white with the medicine, and deliver the suspension from all sides of the claw.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the claw has already been soaked with these images, then it is convenient that you take the claw, and the cut;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is dry at the moment, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is convenient that you deliver all of this, and the cut as well;
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the child is behind her, then it is necessary that you take it all out, and remove the membrane, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is finished, then apply wool soaked in oil and wine to the wound, and then continue with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping that resembles a.i. brougham, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and let the patient groan when he goes;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and treat this disease well in advance with great caution as described above.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you sit the patient on .i. chair gently, then pour the suspended liquid down his throat with two spoons.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	All vessels near the penis, and let the masters tan them, and spread them out flat.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then chop the testicles with a sharp knife in a large space where the vessels are exposed, as long as they are uncovered, and
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scorch each part, as we have said when extracting the arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then put a needle or wire on it where it has come into contact with the first joint, and tie it quickly to the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then place the kopps in a medium position, according to the length of the torso, and remove the corrupt humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as you would other wounds or if an arrow has lodged, so that no vessel is injured and none of the joints move;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this there is no harm done, and all vessels come out whole, so it is necessary to move the joints of all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the oil does not lose its essence due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphyl
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this disease are due to the rupture of the syphyl, or extension in the abdomen in the region of the bowels, so that the intestines descend from that rupture into one of the loins;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this rupture is either due to the syphyl, or to the extension of it, and these 18 ways of bodily pain come from: from impact, from jumping, from bellowing, from lifting a heavy burden, and from similar causes;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is an extension of the syphyl, are that it happens little by little, and not suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are even up to the end, lest the medicine presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the medicine, that it brings about a sudden painful outbreak, and the abscesses are different appearances, desoiling the skin nearby, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the course to the far side of the medicine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there is no time for the circle to move with the intestine, and it is kept back, and causes great pain to suffer in the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these cures of iron has come to fear, for there is no need to hurry.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the way to deal with this is that you command the patient that he keep the intestines in his hand at the wound, if he can put them back inside.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be careful on his neck between your hands, and cut the bowels;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then take the cord above, and peel off all the skin of the intestines;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then put in place the tail bones of the animal according to what you need to open the wound, and be careful not to hurt the patient;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scorch the syphilis that is soiled the skin of the scrotum, until the white syphilis hard be uncovered from all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then dip your two index fingers in the juice that soils the scrotum, in the juice that is between the white syphilis that is soiled the skin of the penis, and between the second syphilis;
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and part what is behind the penis, and between the second syphilis; and then move your right hand into the armpit of the scrotum, and hold the white syphilis high in your left hand, and dip the tip of the penis in all the syphilis towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command to the minister that he extends the penis high, and dip what is above behind the scrotum;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and ask your two to see if there is any of the intestine wrapped or white sfac hard, and if you do not find anything, the bottle in the belly of sode;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or there is .i. thick thread made of .x. fils, and the bottle in the back part of sfac, which is after the skin of the testicles; after cutting, then remove the hairs that appear from the fils, as long as there are .iiij. fils;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then put them together one above the other in the manner of a cross, and tie the sfac, which we have said is sode of the skin of the testicles, with a strong knot of .ij. parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the hairs of the fils and tie them together forming of .ij. parts, so that no vassal that nourishes them can enter in our house, that the aposteme comes out;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and measure therewith the line according to the first line long two hands. dos and after these two lines leave doy of sheaf which is dismembered the cure for the diseases of the body the great of two.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; and chop in the part which is dismembered the leather of the joints, until it does not run, and the bow, as we have said before; then
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	and put the moist wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and I put the line that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And no time is cauterized the white sheaf that we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decomposition of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leaves the line as it is for him; and if it delays at the end, he was raised up by hot water, and put on what we have said, until it ends.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Then heal the wound with other healing, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	from a hernia caused by an excess of flesh
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone attempt to make the cure using fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the elder said that it is made in this way, as the rabbit is put together with the vis, and in a similar way that you tie the vessels, after cutting them slightly on the outside.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut it in half, and cure the abscess of him who has this, as long as the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, as long as he is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No time comes without rupture in the veins, as we have said, and open them; and do not send any of the intestines out, and if any are sent out, it is little, and repair every hour; and if there is a rupture in any of them, patch it quickly.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and wherever it lingers too long in this place, so as to cause a sore or ulcer, as long as any of the intestines are sent out; and if anyone lingers too long at this point,
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens from the expansion of the medicine which is in the arteries, as we said, because it is expanded, then is softened and swollen their vessels and opened;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and it is never cured with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and the patient lies motionless on his back between your hands, then coat the site of the cut with larghesse according to the quantity of .iij. dos:
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then take out the medicine which is in the skin that has been cut, and then take the thread and put it on the site of the cut:
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press to the navel, then cut the 19 lines of hair that appear on the top of the head, and cut both sides;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then remove the hair at the back of the head, and do not cover the skin or extend any other thing, as I have told you in the treatment of the snake in the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then heal it with the healing of wounds. And when you cover the hair, if the wound is healthy and healed,
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	the skin is bound, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is mild at this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the scrotum
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Several times the skin of the scrotum is softened in certain men, because the hairs that are within are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean him up, to make a cut on his back, and strip the soft skin off the natural skin; then join the 21 strips at one seam, and sewed them tightly or 23 strongly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the excess.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Several times the skin of the scrotum is softened in certain men, because the hairs that are within are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you clean him up, to make a cut on his back, and strip the soft skin off the natural skin; then join the 21 strips at one seam, and sewed them tightly or 23 strongly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and cut off the excess.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are according to these two ways as men: the first is that between the two sex organs it has an opening and a shape like a woman's, and sometimes its urine passes out through the vulva; and the other way is with women, and has on its penis an opening like a man's penis and two sex organs; and the cure for men and women is to cut off the scrotum, and cure it as other wounds; in the second way, in those men whose urine shoots out of the vulva, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tentacle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tentacles are a flexible limb attached to the natural body, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it on their hands, and this is a cure. It is necessary that you burn off the excess of the tentacle at your hand or fingers, and do it lightly; and do not cut off too much, lest there be a wound, then cure with another cure as long as he remains healthy; and with another limb that comes out of the mouth of the wife, and use it, and by chance it jumps out, and is like an ear, and because of this they call it the old "ear disease". If you should cut off the tentacle, as we have said above, then cure it while it remains healthy.
de erratique	Of accidental falls
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation of the first line of text:
des emorroides	On accidental falls
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the first line of text:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the woman
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Several types of abscesses can occur in the vagina, including syphilis, pierous abscesses, herpes, estiomenes, fistules, hemorrhoids, and chaut (a type of boil). It is important to note that chaut abscesses, which originate from coiled hair, often cause pain, fever, and redness. When treating these abscesses, it is crucial to allow the patient to rest and alleviate their pain before proceeding with any medical procedures. The patient should be positioned comfortably, with their legs spread apart and their feet supported. Their knees should be bent and their legs pulled slightly towards their chest. Meanwhile, small pieces of gauze soaked in oil or honey (or a combination of both) should be placed over the affected area to promote healing. It is essential to ensure that the gauze does not cover any open abscesses to prevent further irritation. Additionally, it is advisable to keep the patient's skin clean and free from debris. If an abscess has already opened, the patient should avoid lifting heavy objects or engaging in strenuous activities to prevent further complications. The use of a hot sitz bath (a bath designed specifically for treating vulvar conditions) can also provide relief and help promote healing. In some cases, surgical intervention may be necessary, especially if the abscess is deep or has not responded to conservative treatments. It is important to consult with a medical professional to determine the most appropriate course of action.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Mestier is first to the dance that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs if you see the woman hurry down, and desire to smell the air: then the baby's feet come out; then you know that these births are according to the natural figure, and the issue comes out by his head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then lightly press your belly so that the baby comes soon; for when he sits on his head, the second is with him, and the married man of his superfluities by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it comes any time on its feet, and comes strong to the chest or shoulders, and hands, or it comes on its belly, or often, and is turned by chance on its neck, and by other evil shapes; such a thing is useful for dance that she be wise and subtle in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how she must help.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby comes out by its head in a natural way, and the woman gives birth with pain, and the virtue of her is weak, then she should sit on a saddle, or women hold her; and pour his oil or fenugreek, cooked, and then pour dance between her two little palm, from which is this figure:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And tear the second, and wrap her fingers around her thumb so that the moisture that is in it runs outside; and lightly press your belly as she pees, and if she does not pee, then lightly massage with muskillaige of fenugreek with oil of sesame; then make her pee and shake for an hour, and now the baby. And if his hands come out on their own, then you should gently pull them back a little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a chair, and let her legs hang down; then take the seat off the ground, and turn her over, and tie her, so that she does not stand up; and if his hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then wrap his fingers around the knife that is placed in front, and pull out the child, and gently press them.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes down on its feet, then you must lift it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slowly, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	and then spread it out slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	As soon as they jump up, if he is told to run, and it makes it shake with cold.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If you jump, may God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he does not jump as we have said, if the turn is little by little, as much as it is in accordance with its natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he becomes light.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come in the way we have said, take musk from the tree, and oil of sesame, and gum dissolved, and grind all together in .i. a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put on the nature of the woman inside and outside this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then let her sit in cold water until she is completely soaked;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is completely soaked, then let her wear a necklace of mirrour; and leave it on for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And then make it sit in the seat, and then make it shake and tighten its mouth and nose, and pinch its belly lightly, for now the baby is going to jump.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes in this form, if I put the hand on his belly lightly and lightly.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	Then be sealed on its neck, and let it hang downward, and let it lie down on a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and then he presses his hands slowly; and then he takes his hands to his belly, and he pulls out the intestines from below, until she is completely empty.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the patient does not vomit, then take his feet and move them, then turn his belly up, then pour your hands.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and then he presses the baby slowly; and tell the woman to stretch herself until the baby is relaxed.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who comes out wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to plan how to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	If one cannot bring it back, if the woman stands and goes;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, if you make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs straight;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	Then arrange the muscovy duck that I have mentioned;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if it doesn't conceive, then wrap the hand in .i. bandage; then study to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and form the child according to natural shape, and make it stretch, and command that he stretch until he conceives.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the child's issue at his neck, and has spread his hands, and his face turned towards his mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I command that the bailiff shake his hand, then turn it little by little, and lighten up;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, if you put on the musky nature of alto and oil, as we have said, then instruct that it moves little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, if the fire sits on .I. seat, and instruct that it swells; and the fire shakes itself.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes in this way to all the second part, if you put on the second part at your fingernail, as long as the moisture is empty;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if he falls on his face and on his neck, so that the cap is removed from him, that it is not held back, and he dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as you have done so far, and instruct the woman that she should not wash herself at all times.
adonques si istra legierement.	Then if it is lighter.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the delivery of twins.
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	I see that fine ones are born many times, and once in no way; and that is not an unusual thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live, if it were not for fear.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are devised by the apothecary who devises them, which is related to the badness.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and once in no way naturally as all of us, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if it is a grating noise, as we have said before, and the ball is subtle, and do quickly and lightly what she does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and make in such a way as it may be for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No more are formed in the marriage of .i. or .ii. or .iii. or .iv. or .v. or .vi. or .vii. or many more up to .xv. and all are formed by measurement according to the sagacious glory
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and let the ball know all this, for by chance similar things will happen to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	if it is done according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman whose baby has died or her womb is empty, as I said in the division, and if she does not conceive again, and you are forced to work with your hands;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	if it is necessary for you to know that his wife is of sound health, and has no accidents where she might die;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary that his wife be supported on her back, and her shoulders are inclined downward, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife tear her hair from .iij. parts, so that she may be bedridden to treat herself against childbearing;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the pregnant woman with moist oils made from alfalfa and fenugrec and flax seed, then oil her hands with these oils and these muscles;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	Then pour the wine lightly into them, then take care that they are not too full, so that they do not burst.
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that the wine is not too cold so that it does not run down his neck;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you pour the wine into their eyes or into their throat or into their mouth or into their palate or at the side of their teeth or near their sides,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if he pours it down his feet, he pours it into his hands and washes his sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and he should dye the hair at his right hand, and place the comb between his two hands on his left side, and lightly hold the hair with his full hand, and fix the hair in any of these places that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the hair:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	and then fix between .i. another hair, or the tier is in need thereof, so that the dislocations are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then extend evenly from one side to the other, so that they move out, and the hair is held in place, like this:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if part of it lingers, then anoint the joint with oil on both sides, and pour in that part, and draw out the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if any part of it lingers, then put this ointment or more high place, and do so until all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot return because of the tightness,
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then wrap it in a cloth, until all comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	and then wrap it in the joint of the foot or at the wrist, and so you must do on the other hand, and at .ij. feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or if there is an acute angle assembled,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then you must wrap the spine-tip between your two fingers, and push it out and draw out the sharp point;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you wrap it in the instrument that is called "almidach", from which it takes its shape with the tools or chaplet that comes after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and so make him well as much as nature can.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	then pull out the bones from the nails,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head of the shoulder is dislocated and held with force, so that it splits, as much moisture comes out as possible;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut off its head;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is inflamed in the belly or soothes the ribs, then you must pierce it so that the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	and if it is inflamed on its feet, then light traction is applied, and the treatment at the mouth of the leg is simple.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	and if it is dislocated in the belly or in the breast, then you must hold it with your hand wrapped around it;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and pierce the belly or the breast, as long as the moisture that is there runs;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if one of the other limbs is broken, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if he cuts off his hand completely from the arm, and brings it up to the mouth of the stump;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he drinks a little wine or water, and eats something;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the stump is tightened by the scar tissue that has grown there, so that it cannot be eaten or drunk;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	Ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And he should treat with damp and greasy things;
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if he is injured on his side, and you can make it even, then treat him as we said with the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if you cannot do this, then cut it into pieces, and leave none of the second;
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, bring the patient who has been taught as we have said in the treatment of abscesses that come into the hip.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood comes forth, so be it washed out with water restraining, and bring other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had a fetus die, then consult another.I. another on that, and denied it to be dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time the birth was over, and it grew big, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and in it put a bone, and after a few days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was amazed, for this stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I sewed up the wound, and with my own hands, as long as the woman was improving little by little.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and left the woman alone for a long time, and so she became a little better, but her bowels were moving a little from their place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I recalled this chapter only that once, when the master tried an unfamiliar thing, and he knew how to help himself.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the woman back to her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	And here comes the first sentence to translate:
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the corners should be thinner than the restraining piece, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the tube is two fingers wide, and the margin of the trees is two fingers wide, and a palm and a half long;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and the three inches are two ajostements of this same tube, which are firmly fixed on one side and on the other, a palm and a half long or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and the two supports are inserted in the mouth of the mare so that it can be opened when the horns turn .
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another shape, in its more subtle and lighter form, is made from oak or boxwood, according to the appearance of the nails;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and has two supports, one long and one short, and both two inches wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the mare open to all the instruments, so that the woman lies on the bed, her legs outstretched and her feet hanging;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and then fill in the .ij. adjustments adjust together in the marriage, and hold the head of the instrument desos between his cheeks;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then operate your hand on all the instrument, as you have done to the nails evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marriage, until the ball moves this which it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is completely assembled, and the multiples are ready for use; And when you see them prepared, then operate faster, and higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If ever you don't have the instrument ready, because it is not necessary to excuse yourself.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the second child is about to be born, you must order the disease to keep its tongue and then make it spit it out, and hold your hands away from its mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	And if she does not, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	And if she does not, it is well. If he [the child] does not, take a pot or cup, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, as chamomile, marjoram, dill, anise, fennel, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all of these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water on the fire; then put a cup or lid on the pot, and another one over the mouth of the mare,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and the ringworm until the vapours come out of the marris; then the cure is to shake it, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If a second operation is not done immediately.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this cure and is not cured, order the patient to soak his left hand in olive oil or in muskeg of alder, and then pour it over himself.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and the second one; and when she has found it, if she grabs it and extends it little by little correctly, so that the marrow does not come out at the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	But it is necessary to move lightly from side to side, then to twist; and so he will come and dislocate himself again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the wound is dry, we have said the cure of sweating, and of inhalation of herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she is not of all that we have said, keep in mind that you do not fool around when you twist;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that the one who is at the mouth of the wound, you put him in the cunt of the woman, then cauterize with oil of four-fold armature;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	If it is dried out, it will be well again; but if it is wet, then when she swallows, a bad smell comes from her stomach and head, and makes the patient ill.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is appropriate, then smoke that can be used for this should be prepared; no one has tried smoking with dandelion and dried figs yet.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumes the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one if it is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is like a dog's head, and put the subtle crown in nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and the steamings on the coals, and the scurvy while it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who have not yet had their foundations pierced, but they are treated by a subtle and skillful physician.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	if it is necessary to pierce the foundation at the bath, that the subtle physician pierces it with his right hand, and does not touch it with his left hand, and sews up the wound where he has pierced it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then put it into another milk, wine, and oil; then the cure for wounds until he is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not improve, then put a piece of string around it and leave your hand open, and let the bone heal when the wound is open in the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there shall be no sudden improvement in the wound or abscess; if it is a sudden injury, then cover it immediately: if not, treat it with the string mentioned above.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas which come from the fundament are nodations, and grow more than those which come from the fundament depart, or in the space of the .ij. parts,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	If there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodation is old, if it is opened, and soon wet with white or subtle blood, or a little movement of the head causes it to come out,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and these fistulas never persist; and they are known by that which comes out of him when he makes an excretion, and sometimes in salt water or wind when the patient exhales, and sometimes in a spring.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that pierce only up to the bladder, and only up to half the length of the penis; and they reach up to the joint of the testicles, and up to a few inches of the chest.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And so recognize the fistula penetrating to the fundament, and not penetrating.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and so stick your second finger or fundament, and stick a small needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twistiness.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistiness, if you stick a small piece of string, or for instance a horse's hair, as long as you feel the string or hair in your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you don't feel it, and there is neither an exit nor a twisting or twisting sensation, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	That it does not pierce, so that you do not hurry to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is piercing only until the bladder or only until the conduit of urine, so that if urine leaks out, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced only up to the joint of the cunt, if the testicle is brought back up to its place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the pain in the entrails is acute, if he has already been brought back to his place by means of a bow, and there is no need for medicine or stroking by hand;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish mirth that entangles them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are not persans and are not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced, so
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient lies between your hands on his back; and bring his legs up to his hips, and bend his hips towards his stomach, so
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then pour water from an arc or a pitcher if there is a twist in it, as long as you know where the arc comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels pain in the root of his tongue, then you should put your index finger there.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then know that the taste is lost; and if you can feel between your thumb and finger or in your mouth, then you will know that it is bad.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if it does not cause a change in the taste, then you cannot cure it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	All the same, one can sometimes cure some of them well, but this happens little;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and let the aid which we have made, if it is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and pour the bottle all hot in the fistula, as long as it comes gently from the foundation; and do this .ij. times or .iii., as you know that these hairs grown are burned, which is like an owl's feather;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the doctor of tent-moistures wet-dries, as long as that hair grows; and then the doctor of ointment in a jar stirring it and sticking it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healthy, it is good. But if not, it cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if you pierce only to the knuckle which is at the foundation, and place between your two fingers a thick cover of cloth or of silk, and you see the fistula on the side that holds the cover tight;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the patch of the encumbering of the fistula, and stick fast before the tent, and put the cautery after, as long as it comes to the top of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and will be delivered the tent, and will go away; then take off those silk-like tents that seem like a feather of an owl, and there will remain nothing of them.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sun does not go away, and cuts between you and the work, then the fire cautery or medicinal poultice.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For fire cautery brings together .ij. things: namely, the burning of these joints, and the drying up of blood and removal of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and then cure wet tents by drying them out or by burning them, until the leaks stop, and heat these joints in the fire in the leak;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	and then cure the wound with dry herbs that burn in the fire, and let the medicines be dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For once it is healed, then it is well and no longer returns.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just from the foundation, and is distant from the heart, it will bottle up two or three times, and inquire that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	And if you feel the itch, and between iij is the thread or string or cord, or it is ready to pierce, there are only two ways of hope and expectation, through the administration of one of the iii. ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it just to the foundation, or if you put on a poultice and treat it as first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far with the cauterization, so that you cover the foundation and come by the voluntary way of excretion;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the doctor, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	For in case he will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it up completely from its foundation, whether by attempting or by another instrument aimed at;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then the world's fine sand which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the opposite part of the foundation: that is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And there are no times of ulcers according to this way: and it is when you plug the tent in the ulcer, and she is or coasting douz foundation deleze the leathern above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if one takes a tent torn at the top according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and I pour one thread twisted in two, and I plug the tent in all the thread in the ulcer as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is persistent at the base inside, then extract the thread of that torn, so you plug your two or base foundation;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and join together the two heads with thread, and hold them apart from each other, and leave them for one day or for two days;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and do not restrain it once, until the thread holds these joints together that are between two, and they grind;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound as long as it is souded and healed over.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all possible ways that you can, unless it is too completely hidden.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make a covering bandage without first making the wound perfect, and then treating it, as we have said, until it is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spikelet from which one makes a fistula is sharp and has a point; part it and cut through it.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	And on the other hand, for this reason one should not cover with a bandage what one must not cover, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Here is the translation of the provided text:
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and some have one or more, and those that are distant from the foundation and at the top of the foundation; but those that are distant have little moisture, and
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then cut close together or a little apart, or a little water or a little blood, and have the color of the flesh; and
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those who have them within the foundation, so you command the patient that he defecates in bed until the foundation goes away and it comes out; and
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	If you hurry, and hold it with your fingernail, then cut it into its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if his nail does not hold them because of the moisture, then take them from the .i. drapeil, or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and remove them with your two hands, then cut them, and powder them with any hot powders that are in the fire of cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you can cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization with chapister (a kind of substance), then treat them with other treatments until they are healthy again;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if his foundation cannot come out, then cauterize the patient with a hot cautery, and sharp, so that it washes what is at the foundation, so that it can come out freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	When the patient has been burned, and his hair is burned away from his foundation, then the cure is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should hold them in your nail or with tweezers, and pull them out, then cure them as we have said, until they are well, and avoid the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	If it is necessary that you bring the stitch together in this way: take a twisted thread, and put it through an needle, and then draw the thread up from the bottom of the needle, and push the needle through the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread over the needle
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is a large one; then draw out the thread, and tie it, and take out the needle, and do so with all of them, and leave only one . i . for drawing away the surplus blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then wrap it in a cloth wet with oil or wax, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, if he is cured with ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	Douiciously at the end of the foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying up of the ends in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	If you should come to the point of a scalpel or your fingernail on top, which does not leave it to moisten;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then heal it as soon as it is sore, as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be healed, then shave it more strongly than before, until it heals and is scorched;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat him until he is well.
dou fremit	the sweat
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	is a small brown stain on the skin, and goes well with much of the dress;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and it does not hurt the patient at all, and one can feel it even through clothes, and comes throughout the whole body, and especially to the hands compared to elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a feather from an owl or a strong vulture, and place that feather on the wound, until the purple ring surrounds the entire wound.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	Then turn your hand around all the feather until you have surrounded the wound completely, and place it in place, and then clean the wound from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you want to make a cautery with fire or iron according to this form, and be careful not to burn yourself, and do it slowly.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not cut, but rather pinch between your fingers, and press: And if you want to cauterize the wound, as it is described in front or with cauterizing chapiter.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cyst
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No one should make silver or mercury enema, or melted gold or brass; and no one should use these small or large instruments according to those who are treated.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, for the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, these are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cyst is small and large if it is over the belly, or tied according to this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and I saw one distension where the belly is tied, so that you see it, and the ribs are pierced from within; and at one of the sides there is .ij. perforations, and on the other side .i..
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be filled with a capsule of honey or parchment, and let it be pierced all around the small openings.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and between each opening, place 1/10th of a space, then pour in these openings a strong twine made of cow's intestine, and tie the belly together as if it were a sheep.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if the string is in front of a strong instrument, then cauterize it; and it takes on the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with oil of olive or of castor oil or a similar substance, then pour it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	and the minister holds them together with his two hands until it is completely full, then remove the oil, and raise the patient's legs to the wall,
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and let the medicine flow out, as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night, it is greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him because of a disease that comes from the inside of the belly, and the medicine flows out quickly, if he goes back to the same thing as often as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the fundament or abscess, then also the clister is too thin like a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the clister that is too thin so that the skin is held back:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken in the division of the cure of wounds; but now we will speak of the cures of hands and medicines, according to the fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are various according to what they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and because of this they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	Things that cause wounds are by the slitting of a stone, and the hewing of an axe or a knife or a spear or a lance or a fust or a sledgehammer or similar objects; or
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or where the body parts are cut according to their places, such as a wound that bites into the neck, or the head, or the side, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs.
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the reminder will come in my chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound appears where the head is, and the bone is not broken, take care that it is from the movement of stones or similar things, and the skin is torn everywhere, and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the burning of an abscess: if you do not quickly heal from blood loss caused by the wound, and you heal on the opposite side of the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and you prevent the patient's replenishment with wine and heavy meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not quickly heal, if his meat is reduced, and he does not drink wine or eat cheese;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and over the wound, if it is a hot sore, cotton wetted with oil of rose, or with wine as astringent;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if it is not a hot sore, and over the wound, if it is fresh, without moving with the air, powder, which I will call a little further on;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it has been moved, and over some herbs, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, as long as a sword blade and similar things, and the lips cannot be put together by tension, if they are put together by sewing, as I will say to wounds on the belly, from the sewing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone and there is little blood, then bandage the wound with cloth only, and return it to its place.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And instruct the patient to eat large, solid foods, such as roasted meats, grains, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rottenness in the skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut it off completely and throw it away, and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which, without stopping, and he cannot stop it with medicine, then find the artery, and if you find that it is dislocated, then bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit him, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the light cure is: and that you put this powder which hardens so that the fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the way of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood .ij parts; live coal .iij parts, and the powder finely,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and the bandage forms, as long as it dries well and sticks to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it unhindered if it does not swell, for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at no time does one use salt at all, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but that the arm does not move the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arm has moved the wound, even a little, one must then use this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some oil infusions that have been prepared, or peas of barley flour made with water and honey, as long as it is warm;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the doctor prescribes other remedies until he is cured.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if a fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with gentle tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you this afterward about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound at the throat
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is in the neck and is simple, there is no difference between it and that at the base of the head, but if the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is at the base, then there is no other remedy but to leave it alone and not put anything restraining on it, for it harms the base and makes it retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the base is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but either make the medicine hot, as hot water in mild water, and mixed with rosewater, and also wash it with mild water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones from my body according to this method, and oil with moisture.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, if the bandage is too loose, then treat until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	If the wounds are deep and the hair is shaven and full of bowels, if the wound or deeper;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and pain in the heart comes, if the darkness, and the fever, and the cauterization is necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the throat is closed, or a hole made there, and the direction is kept, so that the meat goes down.
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if the hole is cut high up on the neck, and does not touch the throat but sets it back to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then let it rest for a few days, and then treat it with oregano until it is well again;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has affected the bone, then rub it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, if you can't handle them all, and those that you can't have, let the wound rot.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be careful and firm with the issue;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the chapistle.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a wound from a lance or sword, and the wound is deep, then examine the wound to see if there are any signs of life in it: know that such a wound is deadly.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	And if it isn't deep and the wound is fresh, then in the first hour don't apply powder or bandage to the wound that wouldn't hold it in place until it heals perfectly.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and rest, and take care of the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I have a remedy for this, and the leech 13 times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have a wound, put wet cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and let the patient lie on the wound 13 times, or 23 times, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there will not be a spasm, nor a malevolent tremor of the heart from which no remedy is found;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see such good arrangements, know that the wound is safe.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds of tents and other cures, as long as he is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and if surgery is necessary, then know that there is a fistula; and if the cure is done as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is made with a knife or sword, and it is simple, or deep or at the back, then know how to heal what is before it;
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, use sutures; and if it is small, use powder, and if it has penetrated the bone, and split it into pieces, then treat the wound, and if they have become infected.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not infected, then allow the wound to fester, and then perform extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	and the rupture of the womb
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the womb is great and painful and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From a great wound does not come once the intestines, or the intestines go into one another, for this is the introduction of pus.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	And the suture is more difficult, and there is no benefit from a small wound compared to a large one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	For if we do not put the intestines back together again, we should put them back together piece by piece;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	for this reason the intestines swell so that they feel cold, if they return to their base,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for this reason the wound is closed, so that it heals well, if we keep the intestine in place as with the others
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the abdomen is according to three ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common seams have in the seam of the abdomen,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and he sews up the other wounds of the chest, and .ij. other sutures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and moreover they are more proper with the suture of the belly, and I will say each one and I will declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine is foreseen,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and a grating thing is to remedy it, this is by one of the .ij. ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	For the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or that the intestines are swollen by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	and when it is cold, heat it in a certain way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	moisten a sponge or .i. cloth with lukewarm water,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	You boil in acrid squishy and cypress and spicing.
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and let the intestines rise until they are swollen.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and at no time does this water restrain, and it is rotten that its soul is enflamed by fever.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling depart, if you moisten the intestines with water or brew them, and if the spicing is cooked,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for for this reason the entrance is closed to little things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the place with the instrument where we cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first cure is to moisten it so that it bleeds;
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we do not cut it unless there is a great need;for for this cause li chapistre est plus usé, par ceu qu’il peut faire venir la sanglerie de ses membres, et que li malaides sent le douleur moins;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for breaking:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	If it breaks in towards the corbière and doesn't go out, and see the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If it is reset according to the natural form in its own place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	If you can, for this is of great value.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	then you must have the patient lie on their back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place their legs higher than their head,
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the lower part of the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if the head and the breast are higher than the pelvic region,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and if it ruptures the belly in one of the two parts,
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if the navicular bone is higher than the other in this case,
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus one must treat what I have said, in great wounds and pain.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds but also this
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and then place your hands above the wound, and pour on the patient some minister of pitiable medicine that covers the whole rupture with its power.
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and this is the common method of suturing.
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and that you twist a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave two inches at the top of the wound, and I insert a needle with good strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two joints of leather with the two joints of string,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	who is desoiled within, until you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the 17 principal seams of the skin together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain out a double thread through the needle from one side,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then bring together the 17 seams of the wound towards the front,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leaves .i. two of space, and he puts another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then he lays the thread out so as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to what you need with the needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	as long as all the wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles fall, between fine and coarse,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the fine needles will fill all the gap, and the very coarse ones can't enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	For this is necessary that they be moderate in size.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not good to push the needles too far from the hair and the hide.
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the heads of the needles so that they do not wound the patient when they sleep,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or drapes at the heads of the needles so that they keep them in place,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them until the wound is sealed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this way of sewing with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it needs a needle or .ij.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second method of sewing is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and are joined together with a strong thread that cuts easily;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have perceived these things together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if we return the needle to the part where you have begun, in the way that you cut the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place a space of about half an inch between each stitch, twice as thick as a hair;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch is for the king,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed a wound that had a honorable form or belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	which was slashed with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm in length,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was made of well-formed intestines that were about iij. palms in length,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	And this wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I brought back the intestine, then it had been 21 hours.
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and this wound was sewed up after 15 days, and I healed it, and it was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the mirror showed that he was dying, and it was a wonder;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and do not heal it with ointment, for I am in a place where there is no cure, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply cotton wool to the wound nine times a day, and wash it with honey water as long as it was healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you the nine proper ways to stitch:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and thread it from the outside part all the way inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	When she has bitten the hook of justice, if you have twisted or pulled out the needle
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and made it pierce from another part from within towards the outside;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and this sound of this stitch should be that you sew like the furrier sews the fur;
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the hook on one side, and pick it up on the other, until the stitch is completed entirely.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of stitching, which Galiens performed properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is if so that as any font, who assemble the .ij. parties together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one of the chief to the other chief, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	file an agdle or chief of mirach nearest, and pierce that alone only,
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the .ij. shoulders of the sheep;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outside towards the center,
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as .ij. shoulders of the sheep;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce one and then the other from the outside towards the center, in .ij. other chiés dou mirach that are on either side of it;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the common way of binding up and the most used.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Here are the lines from the text:
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Here is the translation:
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	Here is the translation:
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is in mid-belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	is the stitch more painful than others of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as that of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, so that the fire has moved it.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you reset the intestine and cut it, then put powder over it with a cloth.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if it moves again, then put it on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and chop off the hair, and seal up the skin, and smooth it out;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound like this, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to go out, cotton wool,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and stir it .ij. times a day until it is well.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need any other medicine in most cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will join the main members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary that you moisten another light thing in oil of thyme or rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and place it between the knees, and cut off the toes;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if it feels pain or itchiness in the belly, and often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if the black wine tarps, and sometimes the itching comes up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and the perforation inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestinal tract called "Jejunum" cannot be healed once it has been torn.
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	For its origin in the veins and for the subtlety of all the body, and because it approaches nature's essence.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the scar jumps out from the wound, put it back as far as the intestine is fresh, while it is still alive.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and turning towards black, that you lie the place which is black, that do not come from blood there
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for it has veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	and then cut who is between the lien,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and place the two heads pendant des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l'estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bole
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestines are ruptured, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if one can restore it in some way,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	for I have seen that a noble person was struck by an arrow or a lance from the belly;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and there was a wound on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was discharge and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I could learn, and I did not cease to treat it until it was healed, and I sewed up the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw the wound sewn up, I doubted that the disease was still in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there is no harm, but delay in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they said no experiments that when he has a small wound in the intestine, he must be bound in some way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take some flesh from a large testicle, then join the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the flesh has opened the mouth, so he puts it on the iij lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if she extracts her mouth up.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he holds her head back, and it stays like that if it cannot be released,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put .I. another wound after in that way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and bandage the wound;
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If they burn within the bowels, and cause no harm to the patient.
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this thread of intestine that has been cut off,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then lay the thread of this cloth .i. linen thread fine twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then put the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and bring it back to the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of sewing with strings is only useful according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, most importantly when it is in one of the small intestines, there should be no waste, but subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	is called "fistula" universally when it has come to light.
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and most often when it has been cut and a bow has been made.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And the fistula is according to the vertue of the hard and white nodulation, or there is no pain felt,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and is also like a bird's beak;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and never clear in salt water, but thick in fresh water.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and never pokes, but is enough.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no healing.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	This is the translation of the text:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	Here is the first sentence translated into English:
ou por sa malice;	Here is the translated text line by line:
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Here is the translated text line by line:
ou il i a trop de bowe;	Where there is too much bowing.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	Where the leather is rotted, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	Where the medicine is not good for the cure;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	Where by chance the corruption is a way of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where by virtue of its location late digestion, and late health, and flee by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have largely spoken of these causes, and the signs, and the remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is appropriate that I make you know the cure for fistula which is made by work of hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	I see that fistula occurs in all limbs of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from great veins and arteries and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the syphillous person, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or at the spine of the back, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if there is tension that comes to the property of the main member, and similar movements.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this way are difficult healing, and there is only work and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no fistula that does not come to the level that I have said, and you have promised to heal it,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see it clearly, take a piece of rawhide or iron, if the fistula is straight, look at it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, so that the search for a subtle hook of plucking
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	For the plucking plies fold inside the twistiness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula is torn and you cannot easily search for it with hooks,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	then let the cautery fire run along one of the tears,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	For moisture is very short of one hole to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then cut it carefully at your power, so that you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is completely shaved off,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient very well about the pain he feels when you squeeze his hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you really know the location, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	Here is the translation of the provided text:
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	"And bone was the false work and the corrupt carcases that were within;"
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	"and then the cure as long as she is sound,"
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	"and if the fistula is well profound from the right place, so that you can cauterize it completely, as well as you can,"
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	and I dip them in medical water until they reach the head of the fissure.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrode the excess that is stored at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I dip them in a mixture of garlic and sweet wine, until it is healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then the fire cautery as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And if his nose is corrupted by the fistula, then let him cover it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	For in the vein or neck do not hurt or main members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if his nose is uncovered, and there is corruption and blackness, let him wait until the corruption is all bone,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal of things injanrans chara as long as he is sound;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not well, and return bow as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	because you have not yet reached the source:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you discover and examine as much as you can while at the source,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and then you will be able to say whether it is true or false that you have not yet reached the source.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is thus made well, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that decay is too complete so you cannot come there;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other means but to nature's way;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone putrid, and you can pull it at the claws,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if they prick at their base
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if they have several bones, and treat them roughly, do not leave any one of them.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if heat and moisture and care, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you do not remove them in an hour, then put on the wound something that will cause corrosion.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and leave until the hairs are rotted around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then much more easily will the bones come out;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, like a leg or thigh;
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you go so far as to let the corrosion persist until the blackening is completely bone,
puis restoure la plaie;	and then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great deal of corruption and it comes down to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it suits you and you cover all the way up to the corrosion, and then treat it until it is solid;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you of a fistula which came to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you take an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	There was a young man aged between 18 and 24 years old who had a pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	As the matter came to the leg, and escaped through a large abscess, and had no obvious cause for opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the mirror because of their madness they went up so much over that apses opened.
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and when they corroded matter, and became a fistula, and I came from the perforations that all discharged bowels and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many I healed within two years, and I had no skill in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	For as long as I was called upon, and saw a leg and the medicines with which it was treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and he who runs through the gaps with great speed;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and his body became red in youth, and had an amber-colored skin.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I set up a tent in one of these gaps, and then searched all the gaps
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that one came together from the other on both sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and dug into one of the cavities as far as I could see a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it rotten and decayed, and the decay went down to the bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I knew what this bone looked like that had rotted and I was sure that there was no other decay in it except for the one that I held;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to treat the wound with soothing medicines for a long time, and I could not heal it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I began, and uncovered the bone as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the rot, and then I held it, and I leaned to weld the joint;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not as much as cup my hand around one end of the bone, and I carried it away from all sides;
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and he was healed and firmly welded together,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and do not think any longer about opening, except for the weakness of the disease, which cannot bear it,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For with bloodletting there was often evacuation, but he was completely healed,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and he gave birth to a hard bone in place of the bone, and was of good disposition and had no harm or opposite in all things, nor did he have any pain or trouble.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if his nose is broken in any place of the breastbone, then it should be done in this way:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take .i. a thread, and draw it to the top of the bone that has been opened,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command any one who will extend it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another thread of a thicker thread than the first thread above the hook that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and let the head stand still, so you pull the cart rotten to the back.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the cart on the ground where you see the rope, that the rope does not damage the cart;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put .i. a piece of wood or a tree trunk down on the ground so that it supports the cart, so the cart does not rust;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and come as soon as you can see and feel the corrosion, and come again sometime else.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if his bone is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	then uncover the whole carcass; then put
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then make a cut from one part to the other of the corruption, and let the liquid run out from the long cut of the corruption;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then chop off the joint; and if the bone contains it on one side, let it run out on the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if corruption is in the continuation of the 19 joints, then there is no other inflammation than that of copper.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if corruption is where the hand is pricked, or where the foot is pricked, then this thing is very strong,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but you must also inquire about that corruption, how it hurts you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and clean yourself in all the ways that you can, but let the vein or nerve not hurt you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and knows that the incisor and the sutures to cover these bones are many, according to the shape of the bone and appearance of the teeth.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their size and fineness, and their height and length, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for each kind of work, there is the appropriate tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and knows that the work will teach you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this craft.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you take a tool that is suited to this
dou feu	Take fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head may be dislocated due to pressure within or due to displacement.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medication, this corrosion by the remedy of medications, and it does not benefit at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	if it is covered that member until the place where the corrosion comes,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient escapes from death, or from evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the member becomes black, and it seems that it is burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then after the blackness, then go those corrosions of a member to another member.
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and take it all over the body; if you hasten to cover,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is by the pounding of some poisonous beasts, like sea scorpions and eels and similar things,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	then go that corrosion to the top of the head, if it covers, and do not give it space to come out until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, so that the cap goes to the joint, so that the rust does not come up only to the arms;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, so that the cap goes to the neck; and if it passes the neck, then is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no need for a more detailed description of its quantity except for its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and if it comes to the first joint, and if the cap goes after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if she comes where the foot is, so cover all the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if she ascends in the leg, so cover at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if she comes above the knee, so there is no other way but to let the patient die with ease;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or sew the member so that you bind it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one of the ropes downstream, and another minister extend the other rope upstream,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you remove the cart that is between the 18 ropes to the wide spatula, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then the cloth or silk, and place on each side a linen drape, so that the silk does not touch the ground;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring the patient other wound and abscess treatment and care.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the blood runs out when you work, cauterize the place thoroughly.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is complete,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then wrap the member with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is well;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you that there was a good man at home who:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	there was a blackness which seemed to be burnt by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and this corrosion came first in its degree to the foot, so that it stained all of the foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	And when the honor saw the corrosion, it became covered with copper on the foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and after that time the corrosion came again to my hand, and came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put it on things that reflect after purifying the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he said that I should chop off his hand, and I did not want to, that I had hope of reflecting the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die;
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	For the virtue of the man was weak; and he despaired entirely, and returned to his country,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he holds his hand off with copper, and he was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not told it but for the sake of telling something else, if one needs to do it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	For in the middle of the body there is an abscess that remains for a long time and causes great accumulation of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and leaks, and its contents flow out, like the veins of our servants;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the leather which is above it is just as delicate as a tapestry of reeds.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	nor should they touch the bone nor the nerve, and such sickness is called "healthy".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and is not called a "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it becomes so long that it reaches the bone completely, then it is called a  "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the cure is that you take care of the skin all around, and most especially when it is thin, as much as a drape.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and don't burn for its corrosion.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have promised that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not perfect,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is like a vessel, so the cure of the clister is inside:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Therefore, the use of Egyptian medicine which is made in this way:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take equal parts of oil and linseed, mix them together, and put them to cook on the fire in a vessel,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from this according to your need, and the medicine is made of water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and in the cauterization of the breast, and extract the hernia.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine to be extracted after .ij. hours, then remove it by squeezing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	make this water twice, until the breasts are firm, and the milk comes out;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and never is clisterized by water of ash,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	When this medicine is not present, and it is that you squeeze ashes from vine wood, and pour water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then pour it out, and clisterize it, until you know the milk is well foamed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicine, nor water of ash;
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if the cautery of water and honey or it has a little bit of lead powder crushed;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you soak it in honey and wine, that the honey has the property of purifying and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the pain lighter.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have promised that the sins are well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	If the cautery of fire is applied to those who have just given birth,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and if you press it with oil and rosin and make it with wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you apply the cautery of fire to certain medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken in the treatment of herbs;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if it is placed on the skin it is small, and the cautery of fire cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	If a little bit of fire is expanded, and put on a tent of Egyptian ointment,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or Basilican ointment, as much as it is enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, so that the ointment can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the hole where the arrow entered is higher up, so that the cap or lower part is positioned
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the bow is at full draw, if it does not let go of its target.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the eye with your hand as well as you see,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so that the bow goes to the lowest point possible for it.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is at full draw, if it does not let go of its target.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the breast with your arm as you see fit,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	then adjust it in such a way: so that the bowstring runs smoothly down, and leave nothing of the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take medicine that hardens it, to put over the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and are on a .i. drape of linen that covers the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	and then measure the width of the chest on either side. i.e. the wider it is at the first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then put a patch above it on. i.e. another cloth according to the quantity of the chest,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the chest from side to side in order to fasten the bow, and don't take off the large cloth for a long time after a day has passed;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and the one that is on the chest from side to side, often takes it off in order to take off the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and if there is venom or poison or enough of it, or if it has been digested, or not digested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when the medicine has spread in some way throughout the cavity of the chest and you see the nature of what rises from the lungs,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you see that the lungs are moving, and bring the medicine near them;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then let it down in the morning, or third day, and when you lower the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if there is a change .i. another bandage, and renew the dressing.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast becomes irritated after many days, know that the breast does not ache.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons last a long time, so do not despair of health,
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the saint is approaching. For there are men whose late healing of wounds, and those that do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and they bow their heads down after many days, for their sin does not burn.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and their sin is late to be heard and is punished, so prepare medicines of moistened substances dried in utility,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	so that it may be used, for there is a great deal of vinegar, and it is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take care, and make a paste with oil of rose, and aromatize it with equal wine.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then bake and apply it; and that same thing, made more fragrant by cooked honey, enriches.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	When the initial care is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and sprinkle it on honey when it comes out of the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then, with a patch of cloth, and lay it on the breast, and never administer any alcohol or herb long-term,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the celestial plant, which is also like flour of times and hundred
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in simple or compound uses: grind them, and make a powder, and put on the honey that I have mentioned, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and let it cure for a long time, and is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	Then you understand that corruption is perfect, and causes impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the doctor of the cure of the fistula, if as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the fingernail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	is a nail that grows out of the corner of the nail bed on the hand
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Here is the translation of the provided text:
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is put to bed, and one does not take care, so it comes. I.I. an abscess develops,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and cut and get a little so that it cuts the root of the nail, and by chance cuts all of it;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes corrosion up to the bone, as much as it brings painful pain, and the two legs are wide apart, and the color runs away.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	if you cut off all the excess that has been delayed from the nail,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The fire cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if his fingers press hard on the chest, and begin to prick, and burn.
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	if you put a ray of light on the finger that pricks the chest,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and pour it up high, and gently and lightly pour this subtle liquid.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on top of the remaining liquid on the chest burning and corrosive remedies to destroy everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the doctor of remedies as long as he is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, so remove it and treat it firmly, because as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the deformity, so remove it with a chisel as described before.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the doctor of remedies as long as he is healthy.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wild, and bruised, and it hurts greatly, then you must heal it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the nail with a chisel from the side,
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the nail does not come off too far from the nail bed, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if there is something, put something on it to calm it down.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the sore hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two of you should work together so that the baby is born in a man's hands; by chance it may be all flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is some bone there and no nails,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in both of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born without one testicle do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who are born with both testicles may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of that which is charnous so is light, in some way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	the size of that which is charnous so is light, in some way: taille le en sa racine d'un large spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Cil who is born at the root of the joint is grieved to cure: if you hold them with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In those who are born or must be tied at the derriere, it is necessary that you first cope the cheek roundly up to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cope the bone with a suitable thread for this purpose, and then cure it as long as it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by nature, either by birth or by the assembly of wounds, or by fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If you are to make this leaden cast, so that it repairs according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	and then place between two sheets or drape them with oil and rosin, so as not to stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you may place between two thin pieces of linen, until the threads are fused together, as is customary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	The process of fusing together the two pieces of linen is known as "sewding", and it is done with the palms of the hands, as is customary. The leaden cast should be made in such a way that it fuses together with the linen, as is the usual practice.
Des vils	The evil ones
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	The evil ones are huge envelops filled with excessive melancholy that come from the limbs of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and more are found in the legs of those who walk on their feet and work and carry things, whereas others...
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is therefore necessary that you do not at any time take any kind of medicine that makes the bowels move, and then heal from the Basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure of iron according to the following 19 ways: one is that you make the cups, and draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another way is if you find the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting according to this method: arise the first leg with very hot water until the large vein is visible,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	and then strain the leg of the sick person from above the knee to the part near the ankle joint;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	and cut the vein in .i. place, or in .ii. or in .iii. a size of broad,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	and then draw out and pull firmly the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it, and instruct him to dye his meat with black wine;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and then start the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are empty, and leave the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	Here is the translation of the provided Old French text into English line by line as requested:
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	Then dip it in water and heat it until it turns red, and swell up the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you don't have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then dip the part of the leg near the ankle at the hip joint, or in the part from the knee to the foot;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then dip the skin into the vinegar, and peel away the vein of each part, until it feels when you touch it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and she appears red and black, and when she enters or leather so seems as a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then fill the channel with oil until it is raised from the leather, and then put it on a light scale;
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then coat it with another oil in excess of three drops; then scorch the leather on the vein until it appears;
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then let it raise up, as you did, and put it on another scale, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou pied,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then take another size, or more often you need it, then cut it, and cut it in two at the foot, then stretch and cut to the second size; then extract one size after another until it is all gone, then cut it off;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then fasten it with a strong double thread of thread;
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and cut it and stretch it, and tie it with a knot, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it is all gone;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and keep it from breaking, for if it breaks, neither can we pull nor lift it, and this will cause harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have finished treating it, place wet wool in wine and oil on the wound site, and tend to it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if it is twisted and bent and wrapped up together, and does not stand upright, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then you must split it open with great care, but do not cover it; and tend to it as we have described above.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of iron which one covers the vein if it is curved, and does not cut it except to cover the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but being large as we have said, and this is the shape:
De la voinne civile	From the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where there are no herbs or trees, and in the earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance happens elsewhere than in the legs, and this is due to the porridge that comes off the skin.
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	if it comes into the body twisting and turning, slip between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of this disorder are that it comes in the leg a great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	Then the legs change, and the disorder begins to come out, as if from a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, if it is necessary that you wrap a piece of cloth around the neck from one third to half up to three-fourths.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the cloth hanging at the leg, and every time that it is a point to go away, if the wrap around the cloth and the new one.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too far, if you take a part of it, and wrap the rest, and do not cover its root entirely, until it is all wrapped up;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	For if you take it, if it enters in the chest, and brings about abscess and decay where it is, and bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	for as for this thing, it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the top, and there remains nothing or horns.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and never once does this vein when treated with long palms or fingers.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and then there came to me one who was 100 palms long, and when you chop it, if it is cut short or damaged, and it is pierced up to the root,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	then let it all out; and if the matter inside is empty, and place at its location remedies for inflammation any day, then treat it as for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And never by this hand reach to the foot, and least of all when it opens at the joint of the foot or of the leg;
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it causes a great wound, and from which there comes much blood; then treat it as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	of worms that come between the hide and the meat
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	this disease is called in our country "bovine disease", because it often affects cattle,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that grows between the hide and the frame, and goes up and down all over the body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it smells bad at the end of the limb where it went, and it jumps away furiously;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is infected with some kinds of fluids, like pus, blood, or other substances, and it is infested with worms or insects that crawl or swim;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and there is doubt about its malignity, because when it goes through the body, and it ascends to the head, and it comes to the eye;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	In case of accident, destroy the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see him being cured and extracted, he can only be done so once:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	So it is necessary that you place him on a firm bed with a very tight strap:
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	Then cut him from top to bottom and tra lui further, and the blood will run completely into the pan, and you will not find it:
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	If the fire cautery is applied, until he dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does, if it corrects oil, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the oil, hold back the arm in a straight line, then swing up and throw it hard;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and use the medicine of purification with soluble medicines for the bad humors that may cause disease;
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and se warse of meats janranc-porriture.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some limbs,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and moves from limb to limb; and I saw the one which I told you about.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she uncovered her breast, and I saw a small swelling on the breast.
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and I then saw it grow larger like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	much faster than anything, like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain leaves the body part, and settles in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little later it corrupts throughout the whole body, until it comes to the other side of the breast.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then he told me that she twisted repeatedly in her body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how much she moved her limbs from one member to another, for I have never seen this disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	Nevertheless, I have often heard that people with this disease suffer great pain from one limb to another.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not want it, if as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that was because the woman had a dry chest, and the veins uncovered,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and for this reason it appears that she has constricted windiness;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and does not appear to these who are delicate, and who have moist chests and uncovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you have cured this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the limb is raised and firmly supported, and then held in place until the wind is stopped.
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the limb; and if you do not see the blood stop,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the cure of this disease, which stops the wind, as if it were pills of putrid garlic, and pills of serapint, and similar things.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the places of the body where they enter.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The variety of them is such that there are some with large points, and others with small, and some with hair, and some welded.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with .ij. (20) angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and those who bite in any member so according to .iij. ways: or in a principal member bit,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as brain, heart, liver, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she bites in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you after, appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	if it is necessary for you to wash yourself of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes after a few more preparations;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when there is no sign of badness yet, and the arrow is not fully extracted if it has gone in, then treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the skull when the arrow bites and pierces the bone, and the medicine that is on the skull,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	is when there is a shock and a sudden turn and a rash on the skin, and inflammation and a rash on the tongue, and muscle spasm and confusion of thought, and vomiting of food.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and it may be that there is no breath through the nostrils or ears; and it may be that speech or voice is lost.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the moist wound there comes white pus resembling blood, and also like smoke rising.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this sign shows that if you continue with the treatment, and bind the arrow if it is not stuck yet.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	For the sign of the arrow when it hurts or stings, it is close to the left breast, and also seems to be lodged in something hard, not hollow.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and if by chance the arrow also resembles blood, and dark black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat comes, and fainting occurs:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	Then come doubt that death will come.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that does not burn is that there is no foam from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and he sighs heavily and feels cold fear.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow enters the back, then it hurts the small ribs; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the limbs move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow enters the stomach, perhaps there is no flesh hurt from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow lodges in the belly, and it does not go out through the intestine, then there is no hope for the cure or for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow lodges in the bladder, and the urine comes out with a gush and goes away, and the patient feels great pain, know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if the face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and chest and legs and limbs are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the neck or artery, and it does not poison, then as I will tell you what happened to me, do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	There was a man who had an arrow stuck in his thigh at the root of his groin.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried it, and cut off the fat of the ear from both sides, and was healed without any sense of pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I tried another arrow, which went into his thigh, cutting through the fat of the oil from both sides, separating the paper.
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was withdrawn, and I only felt the tip go into his flesh.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and this arrow is great of a turquoise arch, to all that is to say lighter than ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accident came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And threw an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and this arrow was Arabic to the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loved the barbs, and hid them well, and they were healthy for the Christians.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And threw an arrow at a man, which went through his cheek or belly, and I thought he died;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then he passed .xxx. days, if not he changed his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut on the arrow, and set it in place, and tied it tightly, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a home with an arrow through it or a hole in its wall, and the wound is sewed up;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and hold the arrow within it, and do not change its natural state,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	There is no harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I see another man, to whom he shot an arrow in the face and it was sewed up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he remained there without suffering much pain; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And there was a sword given to a prince's man, the king, which had been broken on his neck;
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was completely pulled out
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to treat after she had been injured for three days. The wound was very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I asked her to take a strong medicine, and I did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and she felt pain and a ringing in her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought this was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on them the plaster with the attractive digestive juice, so that their leeches do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the leeches of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on them the plaster every day, and quickly heals the wound, and holds back the disease for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he feels the arrow .i. within his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound a corrosive medicinal ointment day by day, as long as it was open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow which had become firmly lodged;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I put on the wound in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow clearly appeared to me;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and well pass the limits of three months.
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	Then I cut the wound so that the nails came out, and pulled them with force from one side to the other, and could not draw them out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I stopped from devising and inventing means of instruments, until I had the nails well made;
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to this one that its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I have it cut, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And I know that the cartilage of the nose cannot be healed.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I reset it then, and had it welded, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or I will tell you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your cure on what I have not said, for the book cannot include everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise men compare on very little thing, and on what is present and deficient,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	try nine or ten operation, and nine instruments to the removal of foreign things that come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs except according to three ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	either at the place where they enter or at another place;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which leaps out from it, for where it enters, that is an arrow entering its flesh, and never leaps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it no longer leaps, leave the flesh to rot, and make clean the exit;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	And if it is stuck in the bone, and cannot come out, leave it thus for a few days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And then it leaps, and if it no longer leaps, pierce it from within with a sharp tool, as long as the flesh within is soft, and then treat it;
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if an arrow is embedded in the bone of the skull, and goes into one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said can happen to the patient: if you do not draw it out, but leave it as long as it is even after a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	For if an arrow goes only as far as the sinus, death is certain.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if an arrow is embedded only in the bone of the skull, and does not go any further, it is certain death.
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And the patient remains a few days without any bad accidents if the machine of pulling.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is badly broken and cannot be taken out, then administer tar-water as I told you; then heal the joint as long as it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the chest so that it cannot be seen, and you want to find it with all your strength;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you can feel it, then use suitable tools;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot by stretching the wound, and by the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	ne has neither bone nor nerve nor vein, so that the wound is as great as possible;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and if you can extract the arrow, and if it has ears to hold it in place,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	so that the bone is extracted by one-third of an inch from the muscle where you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or rain the ears of the arrow, as long as you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully so that you do not break the arrow, but rather draw it out with pain.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at once, and the ear of the arrow is torn, then draw it out, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the pain of the injection makes you reluctant, then administer what we have said in the chapter about the balm.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and warn against cutting through the nerve and the vein, and do not mention how one might remove an arrow without risk,
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or hot or cold, or firmly or vigorously; and set the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow went in,
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	For this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do so, then set it according to what the sign shows you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, where it opens nothing, or the leather is swollen in a particular place, if we see or feel it appropriately:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, as long as it enters into the bone and widens it, then remove it."
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot be removed, then let it go for a while, and then begin the extraction again until it comes out. "
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if there is a arrow in it, pound it with all your strength;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if it must be cut, and you see to administer poultices, for it will administer. I.e., the instrument is a scalpel
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters into the hole of the instrument; and then pour out,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is cut, pour out the instrument with a pointed end entering it, in order to celebrate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow touches, so that you cut all the skin around where the poison is, if you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	and then heal the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow enters or is in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, then you may cover it with a cloth, as it should be covered.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of covering the vein and nerve, and then extract it, and then cut the wound, as is necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and heal it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the claws for treating arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and this is how it should be done:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the claw at the end is also like the feathers of an owl.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	for bowing the tip of the arrow, as this is the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of nails for holding and for keeping it in place thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	The veins from which one is healed are .xxxi., of which there is one at the head xvi.,
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	This is what it means in English: It is known that: .iij. vessels are located behind the ears, which are called the two "herbeche"
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the 18 arteries that are in the 18 temples appear.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the 18 veins that are in the 18 hairs of the 18, which are called "aspirations";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is under the forehead; and the vein that is on the top of the neck;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the 18 veins that are at the collar;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the 19 veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augerich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the 19 veins that are on the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins that are commonly spoken of are .v. in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	the one is the cephalic, and it lies on the left side, and it is called by the lay people "voinne du chef";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the name is called 'fast', and is composed of the cephalic and basilical.
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	And they call it 'vein-cutter'; and if the basilical is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it 'vein-cutter in the belly', and is on the bright side,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and this is what is said about it: it opens clearly on the breast.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little finger is the one between the ring and the pinky, and if it has .ij. raindrops on it;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the foot are .iii veins: one is dislocated at the corner of the pocket on the left side of the calf,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second which is at the ankle of the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are 3 veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The head pain of the veins that are behind the ears if it helps the old catarrh, and migraine.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the medicine, as I told you, is that you remove the head of the disease,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the leather where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then strain the disease from his neck with a screw,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the .iij. veins appear behind the ears depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	Keep the donkeys at two, and where you feel the chicken's pulse on your right side, if it is warm, it is a sign of good health.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lance and pierce through the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand up towards the top of the vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut off the skin and the flesh and the vein very carefully. Take two days to heal and rest.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then draw it out and wrap it up, so that it is healthy.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The blood vessels that are in the two temples, if they cause a migraine,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and the eyes, and the nasals used to be affected, and in the shape of the larynx;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the patient is such that: I say it like this:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient pulls his neck out, as long as the .ij. veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and send a cold wind from his two feet, and then sign with pain on his throat;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	and place the ring finger of your right hand on the top of your index foot, and blow against it from below,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and place the vein on top, and the cup, as you have done in the .ij. other veins, and let the blood run according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	Then lay the patient down, and place two fingers on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then let it form, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken about its joining and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The healing of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the healing of the facial diseases of old, and for migraine and blindness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that if the patient twists his neck, so that the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the tip on the vein, and hold it firm in your hand or another object, and allow two drops of blood to flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then cut off the neck, and tie the vein until it is well and firmly tied, and never use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, the flame must not be too hot; and the vein is cut across, for fear that the bone may break if the flame is too hot.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The blood of the two veins that are in the two eyelids should be let out, and with the eye, and with the fever, and with the yellowing of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their blood is that the patient should twist his neck out of any ligature, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the blood, and let it go through one little piece of a long flame, a little bit wide, for there is no fire;
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by accident if they break; then let the blood go out, as much as you need, and then tie it well on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The pain of the birth of the child is great if it is in water, and it is sudden, and the diseases of the face are great.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	If it is a headache and a twinge that comes into the face, and even when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	And the quality of the pain so that the patient strangles his neck, then pulls his baby by the hand with his left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a thin long flame, and put it on the lip in the space between the iij. nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	For the vein does not open well here, and the blood will begin to flow now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not make it too large, and make the blood run according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	This is the form of the fire:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	This is the form of the fire:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of health is that the patient removes his hair from both sides, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be standing over the head of the patient, and the patient cuts off one side;
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then heal the vein well and thoroughly, or as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then mend another in the other vein, then wash the neck and draw out the hair gently;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	that the patient does not choke; and leave him until morning, that the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	of the health of the animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	of the health of the lips and teeth, and their care, and the prevention of dental problems and injuries, and the treatment of pregnancy and childbirth.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the qualities of good health include sitting with the patient in front of you, and holding their throat as I have described.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	and then turn the lip, and look at .ij. veins, of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left.
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they recognize it by this that they are black, and by this that there are small veins of them which are black:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	so then turn both sides over, and if you do not recognize it, and you are in doubt about it,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	so turn the larger one of each pair over as well, and do the same for the .ij. veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	About the health of the throat
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	About the health of the throat:
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the doctor is that the patient swallows between your hands before the sun, and soothes the tongue, and looks at each side with a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	So then heal both of them, and do not become too perfect, for soon the veins will be blocked.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins which are commonly cut are operated on in .ij. ways:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	with fire piercing in all directions, or with small blades like the veins cut, and is called "aneurism";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and thin according to the width and thickness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire piercing is called  "mirtin", and is wide as you see it:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins that are tightly closed with great pain and trouble.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive fire:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtle in point, and it is for healing the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellow pain.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The healing of the базiliq, which is one of these veins, soothes the throat, and the collar, and the breast, and the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the doctor to bind up the wound, and to cauterize with fire the artery that is infected.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he stops the artery, and blood loss occurs, and it is necessary to stop the bleeding, as I said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flame should not be held, but cut off like a thread.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the artery does not open clearly, you must extract it and change it with another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	Here is the translation of the text line by line into English:
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and dip it in fire, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you recognize the place of the injury, so that you may extract the arm, and touch the place as long as you know the hair;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the place of the injury, and then extract the arm, and dip the wound in fire, as we have said.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and guard against hurting in the artery when you see the joint dislocated, for it is in the artery; then withdraw.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	and if you see overflowing up there as the urine of a child, and the sinew is red and thin, know that it is sinew from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	then hasten, and put your hand on it longwise, then open your hand so that the sinew does not remain, for it often comes back;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put your arm in its place, and leave it there, and do not move the limb; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if it does not stop bleeding, and he comes to you, and the medicine is not present, if you cut the artery open, for the head of the retort stops it. And stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of fig wood, and cut it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops the blood; as we have said,
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the poultices are not made in several places because of the small size of the wound and the possibility of the vein being blocked by the arm's movement.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The blood from the vein is mixed with the medicine that comes from the top of the heart, and from the chest.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	for it is composed of basilic and cephalic juice, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and the surgeon must cauterize the nerve that is exposed, and if he cuts too much, the nerve will bleed;
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells and the patient becomes gray, and may not heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and the nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any man because of its thinness, then you must cut the nerve with your instrument, and avoid the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, let it be done with a long blade.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The wound of the cerebral artery if necessary, so that it is pulled away from the head, and helps the hairs;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to wound at the olive flame or at the mirτιν flame, because this is the one that saves all veins, because it does not cut the nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the easier path, and not grieve if it fails the first time, and begin again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	And in case the legs of some men swell, if it fails the first time, but do not grieve.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your belief.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about medicine, is that medicine is only necessary to maintain health.
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to prevent the diseases from coming.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the surgery be done in one of the three veins that are on the head, which are: cerebral, facial and basilar;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and you must perform the surgery when the patient is in the state of fast, and in autumn and winter after dinner when the sign of fullness appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and you must perform the surgery on the first day or third day, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The saint who has been cured of his illness does not have a determined fever, but rather that when he wakes up or eats, in all hours and all seasons;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	And it is not good to cure children until they are .iii.. years old, nor women but four months pregnant until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should the old be cured who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when some are to be cured, in whatever way, it is necessary that they take a light enema.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has put his foot out, so that the veins do not attract the intestines' superfluity of poisonous fluid into the main members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	do not cure those who are too sore from meat, or who are bitter, as much as it is necessary, nor those who have dropsy;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if he is cured after colic passion, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination due to pregnancy or childbirth, watching and fasting, and whatever else depletes his virtue, either through weapons or because of the heart;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	and then carefully modulate the humor, for if he is overweight due to meat, beverages, and medications, you have no fault in him;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	and then enter the bath, if anything is harmful to him for subtlety of blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and keep away from the anus at the back of the thigh, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself against work, meat, lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be lying and jointed, and higher than that which you are kept, and rub the arms .ij. times or .iij.;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	Then remove the ligature with care, for when it is too tight or loose, he cannot run without it.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the wound with his hands, until the veins swell and can be felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	and then moisten the wound with a little oil of olive, and then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein to stop the bleeding.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	that the vein not be cut and bleed.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that run like cords to the heart, and some of these are prone to windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts it on fire, if one takes it off fire, and cannot open the vein, then one is from those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, if it is too tight a wound, so that one must be careful about these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, if it begins again a little after that one has been opened or on hospital, if the leeks are swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if his arm is swollen, and the patient hopes, let him rest a day or two, and do not bind his arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	in case there are abscesses; don't go into the bath, and if it pleases you to continue washing, start again.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the dislocation is small, or the joint is slightly out of place, and you doubt that it will hurt as much as you see, so be confident in this dislocation itself to the whole fire;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work a little carefully, so that the arm is swollen; for this often happens, when the wound is small:
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the wound open, do not instruct the patient to use salt, and put a little of the oil on it, for she smooths out the wound, and is moist in that place where there is the oil.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and apply the oil to each wound as you heal the veins so that it stops the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same thing makes a triangle and a bow when it is applied to the wound when it is put in place; if it is too thick, then make it subtle so that it does not hurt.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there is a large abscess that often comes, it must be done only once when the opening of the vein is small;
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	If you hurry, put on the bed an absorbent sponge wet with water and a little salt, and hold it in place for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains in place after a few days no black or green, so do not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on any thing of aloe or myrrh reduced to a juice of calamus, moschate, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times incision and appearance to the health of the basilica: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft at the pressure of the hand, that is that appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text:
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each of the blood types according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see a lump in it, let it flow until it is thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And for those who are healthy and have need of blood extraction, let them make a larger wound and keep the flames wide open;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to heal little by little, and it must be healed by cutting across, not by piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of healing is saved from the decay of blood and the cutting of nerves, and it is better that the healer does not cut deeply but broadly.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give moist wine made from pomegranate juice; if he is heated, if he has a fever, give him three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he has a cold complexion, before the healing, give moist wine made from muscatel, or honey syrup aromatized with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and good-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it is taken to the sea, after the exit of blood, if it happens that it breathes brew of horse, and subtle odorous syrup,
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or paste of syncope for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it vomits up arms, and sometimes sways, if it is weakened by great swaying, that it recovers little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if it vomits up arms after the first swaying, and has a strong heart, but recovers after .vij hours after the first swaying, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who must recover from another side, if he must recover on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For it has caused blood to flow within the body which has been warmed up, and brings on a fever; if so, draw out a large quantity, and widen the opening as much as you can with your thumb.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then that you reward all the conditions of recovery, and place your hand on his pulse as he recovers, so that death does not come from the palm.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this often happens when recovery is neglected.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and do not suit when you see the arm dislocated, and make it come out with the second time, and the pit is closed, that you press it together;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	if it is twisted, that he extends the arm carefully, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but leave it until it heals the second time; or you i point to the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is frozen at the pit of the vein flows,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on .i. little bit of salt water, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein escapes, let it go and do not restrain it, as long as the abscess is calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to drain the blood a second time, let it be done in the middle of the vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that emerges in the arm is the same as the one at the base of the head, because it is composed of the same substance.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the way to use this is that the patient dips his hand in hot water, so that it turns red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	And so let it move smoothly, so that the vein is clearly seen, then cut now inside, not wide nor long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the puncture be wide, and cut well near the joint of the hand, and do not be able to pull it out, then put the hand in warm water, and leave the blood running in the water as long as you have enough of it.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is swollen, do not put the hand in warm water again, for we put it in more when it is swollen than when it is not.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the cut from this vein is safer from all other veins, that there is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The salve of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the way:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Extract the hand, and bathe it in hot water until the vein is gone, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and wrap it crosswise, and cut off all of it, if it doesn't hurt anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't chop it too much, because the nerve is all exposed from within;
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in hot water, it becomes unstuck in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, if you put oil and string on a vein to firmly join it together, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The surgeon should make a cut in the hand on the left side if the disease is in the small intestine, and do all the rest as I told you before on the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The surgeon should cut off the foot if he has any of the diseases that grow on the inside of the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	If, as a result of disease of the mare (horse), there is retention of flux (menstrual blood), and disease of the reins, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of his health is such that the patient must drink cold water, and rub the vein until it stops.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot goes into the reins;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	For the blood goes out at the bottom or wide place of the rain, or at the ankle, which must be held.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it on the leg, be careful of the nerves that are exposed, and treat it across as well as when it is in a cup; and let the fire fade away.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the wound cannot be brought out, put the leg into the water, and let the vein bleed well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if it is treated for the first time, start again for the second time above a little, because the blood is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its pain goes to the hip, when it is for sciatica.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of this pain is that the patient goes in or out, and pulls it off the ankle .iii. two in twisting,
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so let the pain be in all ways that you can, and going through;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth more than you can cope with, for the leg is out, and it is very painful at hand.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not cure it, if there is no rain from him who opens or closes the foot, and towards the little day, and guard against the cold.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make so much blood go out that you see it, and then unstring the ligature, and put cotton on it and hold it; now it is healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	Vacuum treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or of air, or of glass; and the treatment with the vacuum is done according to .ij. ways: either by hurting and drawing out blood, or not hurting.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this ventilation which is not to hurt so it is according .ij. ways: or it is with all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and ventilation that is made to hurt and to extract blood so it is done in 123 parts of the body
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	from which one is all on the top; and the other is half around the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and 2 others on 2 sides of the neck; and 1 at the bottom under the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the ventose of the .ij. shoulders; and the ventose on the crups;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the ventoses emmy the .ij. arms; and the ventoses of the .ij. legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the ventoses of the .ij. ankles; and the ventilation does not treat of blood, unless it is that of small veins that are scattered throughout the carriage;
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore you do not fear any injury, if it is done like the treatment of a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be amputated, nor with any fire or hot application in any disease that comes from over-fullness, as long as the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if, because of the necessity of disease or habit, it is necessary to amputate, or because of a particular hour in the month, or at the end, and each one in turn;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	For there are those who, when they need to ventilate, become very heavy;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and if there are those who, with the ventilation, have paleness and redness on their face and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who drink a drop of blood in their mouths, and have escaped the tongue, and yearn for blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such people who dream and see, and feel pain, death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is mid-month, we order them to breathe out after .iij. hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The sage of the muse so helps with grief in the chest ... that it comes to the eyes, and does not come except after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this ventilation if it is in place of the health of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not come to anything that is of cold disposition in use, or who has chaturd (a word possibly related to "chatur" meaning "impure"), for this does them much harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of that it does not come to anything that is of a cold disease in use, or who have or head cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are healed from it often become confused, and because of that the fire cautery should be put a little further down by the doubt of confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The ventilation of the neck is at the level of the sinus of the head and the base of the skull, and for this reason it causes contraction of the muscle of the spine.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to a split in the channel of the windpipe, and all, and to filling up;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to push back, for if it holds too tightly, there is danger of a chock or stomach or place.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The ventilation of the neck is at the level of the sinus of the head and the base of the skull, and for this reason it causes contraction of the muscle of the spine.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of the saint's bazaar; and it is necessary that you command the saint that he express his hand to put it on, that he does not cut the artery, and does not cause bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings of the nose lead to disease in the mouth and decay of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the saints of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders lead to a disease that comes from heat and filling up.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The windings of the neck lead as much as the three veins of the arms,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	For it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and command the surgeon that he does not cut too deeply, for the arteries and veins are bare of hair, and it is easy to cut into them.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the back so easily rips out the foundation, and the disease, and it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and of leather, because it has to milk well; and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs so easily rip open, for they draw blood from the entire body, and resemble ancient pains of the legs, and of the hip, and of the knee; and they weaken the body after a long time, and bring about premature death in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation of the text line-by-line into English:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	"And if the skin is thick, then it is necessary to hurt .ij. times: the first time for subtlety in making the deep vein route."
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	"And if the skin is very thick, then it is necessary to hurt the third time; and when we want to milk the blood little by little, then we should hurt only once."
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	"And if we want to extract blood, then we should do it often; and if the skin is thick, then we should finish it completely, and the end should be that the vein bursts suddenly,"
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and to those who have thick leather and hard skin, that you ooze the openings of the suction cups with oil that opens and dissolves.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with seed oil of the cucumber;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in veal, with nettle oil, or with lily oil, or with chamomile oil, or other kind of oil.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is very cold and thick, take almond oil, or balsamite oil, or aniseed oil, and other oils.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if one has a painful swelling and large pores, then it is not necessary to put oil on.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it should be washed after the wind has passed, whether it is warm or cold water, or water from a mulberry, or water from a cucumber, or water from porcelain, or similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And if one has moisture, if it rises thus, or water from myrrh, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And if one has large superfluities, they rise from old wine, or water from thistle, or a decoction of fennel or chamomile, or similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and is not well to use a suction cup before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath an hour or.ij. and do not sleep after the suctions,
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be washed when he needs to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And guard against those who are prone to anger, and whose blood is too hot and fiery;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	if he eats cold things, such as grapes, endive, lettuce, and asparagus, and milk, and similar foods;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and let there be small fish, and a cage, and wet meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those with a cold complexion should drink honey syrup and fragrant wine that is between old and new, and let there be small fish and birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day that it rains, so as to drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give to some people no more wine or musk before or after the wind, in order to strengthen the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and be subtle with the salt, but it only works if you are warm.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The leeches that are used to hurt are those placed on the liver, and on the stomach, and the podagra, and on the belly and the buttocks and the rain and the thigh, because this member does not feel pain when it is bitten.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and one does not do so except to attract blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we do with the breasts when the milk comes out; by removing the viscosity that is in the member, as we put leeches on the belly and the buttocks to reduce the member.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and bone the pain, when there is operation or stone, if bone by its attractive power accidently the operation, or deserts the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and so do this when you put it on the liver and on the mouse when there is wind held back,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these suction cups are empty prepared to suck so little; and never are they prepared together fire, and no time the water of the well,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as such as diseases of the lungs, and in this way the suction cup is filled with hot water, or water in which it has cooked herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it should be 3 inches long and half a palm in diameter, and it should have a small hole at the center, about the size of an awl.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and be made of brass, so that it does not burn the patient when applied to the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have a brass or iron crossbar in the middle for a handle;
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and long and short ones according to the disease and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	For the suction cups of children are different from old people, and thin people from fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And it is necessary to put this suction cup on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or .i. smoothly, and put it in the middle of the suction cup at the root of the limb which is in the middle of the suction cup,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and your two hands are on the hole that we have said, so that when you put it on, if there is steam, and then remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the lining as before, and renew it often, if you need to do so.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the suction cup that is used for pleurisy, there is no verge or hole, and it is only useful when it is plain of water, and is placed on the limb only a little.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	And it is not possible to apply suction cups except in limbs where there are small spaces, such as the lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the skin of the chest, if it is thin like two fingers or a nose, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of using them is that when you find suction cups that are in clear fresh water, take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them in honey, until they are family, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then heal the wound and the abscess, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the poultices;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are healed and have grown, and where you can put a poultice, you put it on, for that is good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, raise the leg thus, and then dip it in water, very well, and then squeeze it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if it is too warm after the body of the snake, then a linen towel in cold water, and put on it, as long as the snake is stiffened;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if there are many snakes, then put on it crushed vitriol or garlic and similar things, as long as they are stiffened;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the ground half of peeled peas, and let them burn at the fire, now they will be stiffened;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more work to do, then take other snakes.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the blood will not take up, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you put in an needle as long as it shoots out blood.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then lay them on, and soon as they feel the pain, so they die;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are crying, then sprinkle on a little powder of aloes and marjoram, or ash, so they will cry now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapter of this book is necessary many times in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of breakages and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, you who read this, that the wise men have never poured this paste, and neither have they ever read about it in any of their old books or letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason the science is strange to us in our land, for I never found any good one before;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except that by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much and treated the science, and by experience, and by the custom of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the preceding twenty chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sums of speech and the chapters where wisdom is placed, and delay on truth, so that those who are tested know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture, dislocation, twist, or strain comes to anyone, it is appropriate that you hurry to save the sick person from one side and the other, if nothing else can save him, so as not to be weak of heart, or infirm, or old;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if his temperature is not very high or too low; and do not drink too much water, nor eat too much food, and do not fill the member with matter that causes blood loss, until you have no doubt about the apogee of fire, nor about the expansion of material in the member; but return the sick person to his usual government which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with meat that grows fat quickly, or has viscosity like cooked wheat, and rice, and eggs, and pies made from dairy cheese, and poultry, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a quick healing, the nutrition must be increased, and the break must heal faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that broken bones of the old and frail will not heal or harden according to their nature by the loss of members, nor those that are too soft, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but have no cure, bring together the broken ends of the bone. i. large bones that heal and join the member together as much as possible, so that it hardens as it was before; and do not stop at all from its work, and because it is necessary to feed on large meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are many and various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break in the head is other than the break in the leg, or the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that goes to the shoulder, and another in the limb, as when one cuts with a knife, like the length of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a small break at all.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each case there is an instrument, and its own special tool for restoration, according to what the memory comes back in place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	And the fracture of the bone is caused by what the angles are twisted and opened well from one another, and some to the presser of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	And when there is no twisting or turning, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	But it can also be that there is twisting, or a wound, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move the shoulder by hand, but put on medicines that come later, and then hold it now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that goes in the shoulder, and are the .ij. parts separated, it now comes to put them equally, so that the abscesses come quickly;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	And if the abscesses come quickly, if you leave it for a day, as long as the abscesses are calm;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	Then put it evenly on the medicine that you can apply lightly and safely, and know that the restoration of the shoulder is easier than the restoration of those where there are pieces; then hold it, as it comes later.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone is broken in pieces, and it extends by half parts, whether it be hand or foot, or a small member of the hand, or to two strings, or to a string and to your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the broken parts of the member are healed, you remove by all means the additions in their places at the same time as you can, and guard against your work causing injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and set the two shoulder bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well to the hand if it seems not right: if it is set well, and does not strain too much, do not press it as those who make it come from their work do with the shoulder, by chaut and contraction of the member, as we have often wanted.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limbs are set in place, instruct the patient that he not move them, neither while watching nor sleeping, turning himself around, or by any other means.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and make sure that the limbs are so secure that they do not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when there is no pain, and it is set in place, and make sure to put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and make sure that it is placed correctly, so that no awkwardness comes when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	I know that broken members are different in smallness and greatness and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are little members, such as breast and toes and similar things: it is necessary to wrap them in linen cloth soft and subtle;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are fat, such as chest and leg: it is necessary to wrap them in a thick and sturdy linen cloth, for the thick linen cloth embraces all of the large member, and holds it steady from all sides evenly, so that there is no itchiness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then he will bend the leg a little, .iij. times or iiij. times according to the limb, and with his hand will grasp the whole length, then he will go up over the break and will hold it less tightly, so that the break then moves a little away from the break;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and he will soften the ligament a little and a little, until you press on a great part of the healthy place, then take .i. other limb, and turn back very much over the broken place;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the part of the break, and hold it gently, not too strongly or too lightly, as we said in the first line above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then put between the leg-strings of linen or drapes, until they are all even, then lay it down completely .i. bend, and then put your well-made braces on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is an abscess or abscess, put something soothing on it, and let the abscess drain, and leave it like that for a few days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then extract it from your bones, and make a half-inch cut for bleeding, or use a saw made of wood, or palm leaves, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the bone which one puts on the fracture is a little thicker and wider than the other bones;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also according to the size of the member, small or large;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	Then tie it to the stakes also as you did at first, then tie it above on a string, like in the first place on the splinter.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	Then tighten it again, less tight than before; and it is necessary that the string be thin, not too thick nor too thin, and made of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	For if the string is thick, like those I have seen for the works of fools who make shoulder strings from linen threads, and that is a great mistake, because the shoulder cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should be less than two inches between each stake;
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pricked by the hooks of the stakes after the string has been tight, then put wool or linen rags there so that he does not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the rupture, and the cure is broken, I will say the cure hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not correspond to extract all the members of the first day when they are broken.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are large, it does not correspond to put splints before 2 or 3 days or according to the injury of the abscess; but
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and here is the manner of the ancient splints to restore the rupture, dislocation and torsion: and it is that you take the flour that holds on the walls of the mill, and mix it with ample egg, and put this confection, neither too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the splint restoring the rupture in many dispositions, especially in women and small children, for it is not too much chopped or twisted.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering to restore the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take Z abarays and ladany and enule and asefetida and arabic gum and muga, na 10Z; myrrh and aloe, na 5Z; alochil 70Z; and grind them into a powder, and mix them with baboon's blood of uff; if the complexion of the ome is warm, use this plaster, because it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way of plastering that is useful for torsion: take muga and viscose, na 10Z; myrrh and aloe, na 70Z; acacia vi Z.; bolic armenic 10Z, and grind them well, and confect with strong or baboon's blood, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way of plastering for joints and bones out of place, and to soothe pain suddenly, and to fit the bone: take a new one, and moisten it with warm water and oil, and put it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore properly, but it is good for soothing hot pain in an abscess, and for properly fitting the bone.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way of plastering that restores broken bones: take dry fig leaves and earth-olive leaves, and grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Other way to embowel in the restoration of bone fracture and to soften the remaining of an abscess. Take root of marshmallow, chamomile, violets flowers, wheat flour, from each one part; grind it, mix with wine, and the members are heated, mix it with water from coriander, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to embowl more strongly than the first, when an abscess lasts until the restoration of the member. Take roots of marshmallow, flax seed, borage, melilot, and windflower, and chamomile, from each one part; grind it, and mix with water from salt, or with sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ypocras states that one should not put on the broken member for restoration more than a wax and oil cerot, and nothing else, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen states that one should put on the broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as mirr and aloe, and incense and similar things, such as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Other methods of plastering that are useful for lesions and pain: grind up the bones of small animals, or the feathers, and the veins, and tie them together evenly, then crush them, and make a plaster out of them, and lay it on the wound.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	Then take off the plaster bit by bit, and see if the patient feels any pain, or if the bone moves out of place; if not, take off the plaster with your hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the spot, or itching, or there is no rest or swelling; then quickly take off the plaster, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge of sea water, and dip it in the water, and lift it up, until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, moistened in water or rose oil, and lay it on a nut, until you are sure of the warmth;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and rest the inflammation of the member, and be bone the pain, then recommence the place gently, and a little plaster, and do not strain it so hard as before; and gently until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and swelling are all gone, and you need to use plaster and binding, then start again, as you did at first, with equal length.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if there is no improvement in the member as we have said, do not remove the plaster until after three days or four or five or six; and never leave it on for more than twenty days; according to what you see, as long as the break-out comes closer to the shoulder joint.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then keep it on longer than before, and let it thicken its flesh as I said above; and if you see that the moisture disappears faster than it should, know that there will be no improvement. Then remove it after three days or four or five or six; and never leave it on for more than twenty days; according to what you see, as long as the break-out comes closer to the shoulder joint.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Let there be a warm water bath, every day, and this is for each part, and let there be salt in the water.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	For in this work, let there be a hot water bath, and this is for each day, and add salt to the water; and let there be a careful examination of what is wrong with the limb, so that it is restored wrongly: it is evil, and if it is painful, and I see no other remedy than to ease and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breaking, and there are different shapes and the causes are distinct.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For he has fractures that are made by the impact of an spear, and the collarbone breaks all the bone until syfac which is dislocated the bone, so as to do what one does or was; and for this reason this method of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the spear breaks the bone from above without piercing it, and is called in this language a "brisure absolue"; and the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact from within, or a fracture, or a collarbone of stone, or a fall onto stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a piercing fracture, which approaches but does not touch the tendon which is outside the bone, or which is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that has healed in the bone as fine as a hair, and it is a small split, so it is called this break "capillaries";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by a stone or by falling or by some other thing, and it enters the bone as a piece of wood enters a cauldron when they pour it into the cauldron; if it goes into the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often in the lower part of the body, where the bones are softer, as in the case of a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And all these types of fractures, small pieces break like plates of metal, and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and the investigation at tents, and the carriage corrupt that is upon it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when the bone is uncovered and rubbed up against, so that it opens up a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be careful as to what happens to the patient, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of feeling, extension, clumsiness, fever, or hot sweat, and red or wrinkled skin, and other similar symptoms in multiple body parts, it is doubtful that they can be healed.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any likely accident, and you hope for a cure, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the baby is born first to you, and it's in the winter, then it's necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day of the month for you to do.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in the spring, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day of the month so that the tissue around the bone doesn't rot, and the accident that we have spoken of comes about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break in the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the skull, then you must split the split part thus: and it is that you press on the chief of the sick person, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the departure of blood comes with the uncovering of the bone, or abscess, then you must aid him who is in that need, and it is that you fill the place with damped linen wetted with oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calm, and be sure of the loss of blood; then begin to cut into the bone, and it is done according to .ij. ways of operation: one way is that you chop at the narrow end in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut wider than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you make a number of different cuts, some wide and some narrow, pointed, and made of iron; and do it lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it inside, as well as you bring taillemens with tethers, not perfectly so that they pass beyond the bone, and should have above the point a margin or .i. circle, so that it does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tethers for all test; and this is the form of the .iij. ways of tethers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	Here is the translation of the text:
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, if it seems to you that you rest the sharpness which is kept by the bone from all .i. other instrument resembling an incision, but it is necessary that it be more soft and more fine than the other incision;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it does not keep anything from the small bones, nor scales, if the bone is lightly tied to any instrument; then heal the wound with tenses and oils that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way to work if it is that of Galen who says, which is more effective; and press it very hard, and this is his word:
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you should uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture has opened up, so that when you have uncovered this part, you shall place the end of this lenticular chisel upon it, from which comes this shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side, and the section is wet in two. 2. sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then take a small mallet on top, so that you knock lightly on the bone all around, and be well aware of the tendon that is attached to it;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is fixed to the bone, so knock lightly on the bone, because when the bone is well fixed, there is no pain, and there is no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce the skin, and cut the bone only slightly from above, and there are small pieces, then cover this roughness with a fine razor that you must have in various quantities, to apply according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are facing great razors, and after smaller ones, do not cease to do this as long as it is necessary.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and delicate shaves, you must adapt according to their shape; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered by those who have put their study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is infected, you must take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil, and put it on the wound; and you must put a poultice on top of it.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another doubled cloth, or two or three, and dip it in wine and oil, and put it on the first cloth; and make it lighter than you can, so that you do not harm the wound, then apply it above the other linen, and do not strip it off except to moisten the wound only;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it so .i. jor or 13., until the abscesses are calm, then take off, and administer drugs like roots of licorice, and flour of times, and powder of incense, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put on the wound, and administer sometimes drugs that do not cause itching;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and guard that the wound be clean, so you do not leave it alone or allow it to gather bowels, for when bowels gather over the brain's membrane, if they corrode and burn, they bring great harm to the patient; because when one puts a mordant drug on, if it does not dry out above it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be careful, for any bad accident may happen to the patient, as we have said, if it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blacken does not come because of the medicine that has been put on, which has its virtue, then you must squeeze a part of honey and 2 parts of rose oil and one drape of resin, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then the cure in a way that he understands, as long as he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You know that never are broken the .ij. parts of the neck from above, or one by one for he has 12 bones; and those of the back are cartilaginous, and do not break if they are bent or twisted, but heal.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the 12 parts is broken, then you must drive your little finger or thumb from the back of the neck and set it equal to its natural position by turning it in at the index finger and out at the thumb until the neck revives according to its natural form.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do it lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain in your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if his fracture is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to its place, know that you put it equal to the head of a stick a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if his fracture is in two parts, then do not restore it another way, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	If not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscess at the base has calmed down, then bandage it with linen cloth at the neck, if his fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bandage the other side from the first, if his fracture is there; and let the wraps be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that there is no restoration unless the tents are made wet with ash and powder of mill; then leave the tent until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never bottle the water of the pen of an owl in place of the tents, and if it is so hot that it dries up and cracks the skin, and blows on the patient, or does whatever you see fit to do.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses open up while you are operating, put cotton wicks wet with rose oil or a little drop of dioxylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if the abscesses open up, put an ointment made from wheat flour, and incense powder, infused with ash of owl, then apply it to light dressings, and do not tie the wound shut.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break is small, it is broken into small pieces, so that when it is extracted with suitable instruments, then cut off the end, and cure the things that are attached to it, and bind it together, as you do with plasters and ointments that suit it.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no pain inside the neck, then cure the wound, and put on bandages of wool, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the break in the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no pain, and the break is not very big, and it does not hurt much, except that it may be a little bit dislocated, if you can see lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	Il covient, si li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	It is necessary, if the break is on the right side, that you stick your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left jaw, stick your index finger from the right hand into it, and push the break inside gently, and make the same motion with the other hand away from it, and make it equal. And if the break of the jaw has been done in .ij., it is necessary that you regulate extension by .ij. parts, as long as it remains equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth has occurred, or the rupture, if they are drawn out with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place on the broken jaw a waxed thread, and on top of it a double fabric; and place on top of that a large well-made platelet, or a piece of leather that is equal in length and width to the jaw, and tie it to the muzzles that you have, and order the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the appearance has changed, if you leave it for three days, and then reset what has changed; and apply plaster to it, with flour from the mill mixed with ash or wheat flour from the husk, after you have taken off the wax; and apply a light layer of plaster, and if the plaster applies itself, and the patient’s condition does not change, leave him healthy for as long as he remains so; often he gets well in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses develop, administer as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, let no piece of the bone be osteted; if subtle, use the instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, then widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have osteted all these pieces, and if there is no delay, so that the wound is wide, and put on it plasters suitable for this, to prevent injury, as long as it is healthy.
de la forcele	Here is the first sentence of the text translated from Old French to English:
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Here is the translated text line-by-line:
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	1. The fire cautery breaks several times in front, before the shoulder, and so it is broken and dislocated in two ways: either it is broken and dislocated at one end, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	1. And if you have to extend more, so put a round staff of cloth or other material over the shoulder of the patient, and make it large according to your need; and stretch the fire cautery, and hold the staff with your hand, so that you make equal the break, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder away from the opposite side, so that it comes out completely, then the patient should lie down on his back and put his ear on the ground, and let the minister lift up the shoulder blade, until the bone of the shoulder comes up.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then put the break between your two sides, and if you find that it is broken, then you must split it; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, then take off the instrument of the shoulder, in order to save the life of the patient:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it should be like a spoon, and not a chisel, and be as wide as the bone requires and the work permits; and there are 16 chisels, if you see what I mean, and one is wide, and the others are narrow, just as the break in the bone that you made when you split the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure that the wound is hot, and if the break is small, or if you doubt about it, then employ linen and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come up, so moist him with oil of roses and with wine and put on it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The extraction of bone, when there are wounds and bruises, is that you put on the bone with the plaster of the mill and with the ash of the oven, and put light staples on it, and put a spike through it if you need to do so.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very long band of one palm wide, then put two drapels on it, then plaster it; then take a thin stick of two fingers wide and long, and wrap it around the band, so that the top of the band is hanging;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stake on the broken part, and turn the band over your neck, and fasten the stake on the shoulder blade; and take back each part, and when you see that the time is right, and you clearly see that the stake does not move from above the bone, then release it every day, and when it slackens, if it tightens;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and let the patient lie on his back, and bind him with a small sling from the shoulder, to raise the dislocation up; so that the dislocation of the shoulder is eased by the tightening of the sling, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not loosen it until the accident has been cured for 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and then recommence the plaster, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place, and leave it so until it has healed; and it heals in 26 days, and less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	For the dislocation of the shoulder: Place the patient on their back, and bind them with a large bandage; make sure that the bandage is tight around the shoulder, and do not loosen it until the injury has healed; then apply powder from the mill with an abundance of egg white, and dust lightly, and place on a double cloth; then place on top a broad and thin board, one width wider than the shoulder, and remove the board's hair in any place where it touches the shoulder, except for the hair that is on the skin, so that the board sits evenly; and then hold it firmly in place, so that the board does not move from its position, and check it every day; and whenever it moves a little, hold it again, and make sure that the board is even if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on his back; and the shoulder will be healed after 20 days or 19.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone projects forward and there is no space to move it back, then cut into it, and make as we said in breaking up the shoulder blade to calm down an abscess, warm.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the piece
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	of the piece is never broken in the middle, but it often breaks on its own; and when it is broken in the middle, if it declines towards the side, and causes great pain to the patient, and lack of aliveness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the vessels in the broken bone, and it smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the restoration is that if the patient lies down on his back, and you put .i. cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the .ij. ribs with your hands, and gently make it equal in all ways as much as possible so that the appearance of the bone is like; then wrap it in .i. blanket, and cover it with a thin fabric of salt, or another light thing, and lie it on the broken bone, so that it does not move; and return the ligament to its place, and tie it tightly hour by hour, and if it relaxes, release it, and remove the covering, and treat it in the manner of cures; then remove the covering, and tie it again as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I know that the rib-break does not occur except in large ribs behind the back, and at the top inside, and do not ache much unless they are thin; and the sense is good to inquiry.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And restore them so that you make the break even, if it is necessary. And then put plaster on it, and tie it with a strap, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib-break is declining inside, then the patient feels great pain and aching, as if it were weeping; for the bone rubs against the membrane; and it makes him weak, and he has a great loss of appetite, and this is a sign of bad health, and the old ones have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if one of those who serve says that it is necessary to administer meat which swells the belly, to throw the breath away.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, because when an abscess is hot, it will come if it has not already come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then let the patient lie down.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And none of us say that we put vinegar on the head, to draw out the wind, and this is right; however, doubt I that the vinegar will attract the excesses to the head because of the weakness of the disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And said no one of them that the place of another should be covered with oil hot, and put tents between the ribs to make equal the space in front, then it is cured of the plague cure, of meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that pokes through the towel, and doubt comes to the patient, then it is necessary to split on top of his place on the rib that is broken, and put there a special instrument to stop the bleeding; and then it must be sawed, and pulled lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and treat with poultices until he is well. And if abscesses come up, then place towels wet with rose oil on top of them; and put on his place. And cure while his place is infected, and let him rest on his rib where it hurts, until he is well.
de la brisure dou col	of the rib fracture at the throat
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No one comes to break the bones of the neck, and there is pain; and also in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when it has happened to anyone, and you see whether he will be healed or not, if you see his hands soften and swell and die, and cannot move them or stretch them out, and when you poke them with an needle, if there is no smell of it. Know that he is mortal in many states, and if they are still and smell well when they are extracted and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the sick person is cured, if one puts cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the back of the neck, and you see whether he will be healed or not, if you see his neck soften, and the accident that is in his hands, and on the back there is windiness and excretion without willing; and when it is sovered on its belly, if there is no excretion without willing. And when it is sovered on its back and it tries to stand up, it cannot. Know that it is mortal: if he does not work in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then that is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if he has an abscess, put oil of rose or oil of moly on it, as long as it is calmed down; then put it on a padding of comfort and drying, and tie it with a rope, and command to the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels the pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, then cover it with the curative poultice; and set the bone, then join the two lips of the wound together, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with poultices until it has healed; and if the bone has been broken, which is called the "bone of the knee," then take your handkerchief from your left hand, and place it flat against the other hand at your side, then apply the plaster and cover it with the cloth, if you need to; then bind it on, and if any bone has come loose, then push it back into place, and cure the wound until it is well.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the leg of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	There is a possibility that the leg hip bone may be broken, and if so, it is only a slight break at the head; and it will cause pain and swelling in the affected area, but not as much as a complete break would cause.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the setting in place is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break; and know what the break is and what form it has; and if the break is at the head, then make it even, as long as it is in its natural form.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if it is broken long way, or she declines inwards, so make the disease go up on his belly, until the restoration of that break is arranged for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you put the plaster on, then put on a beam of wood or of timber, and draw out the break, so that it does not move; and fill in the space between the ribs, until the place is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the disease to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come out, if they do not hurt, until the abscesses are even, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold them back as it should be, unless there is a bad accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	the dislocation of the shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one must restore it according to one of the following two ways: in the first way you take a strong rope, according to this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And the two shoulders are tied together with two ropes, and they are lifted up, and cut the patient on one side; then put the shoulder into a sack of rope, and then lift it over something heavy or a weight; then make the dislocated joint equal to his hands together, until the dislocated joint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	In the other way is that one should sit the patient on his back, and tie his hand to his collar, then command two ministers that one who is on the dislocated shoulder's side should hold it at its sides, and the others should stretch each of them to their parts.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	Et s'il le poignent à leur naissance, on lui retire les yeux qu'ils ne bougent pas tant qu'ils naissent.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	Et si tu vois que l'extraction soit plus forte, si on tire.i. le lien des os la brisure, et sur la brisure, et on étend chaque ministre à sa part. Et si la brisure est proche du chef de l'épaule, il convient que tu mettes.i. le lien moien des os l'assèle, et.i. autre vers le coute, desoz la brisure; et aussi si la brisure est devers le coute, il convient mettre.i. le lien légèrement, sans travail, tant que la brisure soit égale sur le coute; puis on met égale la brisure, si comme il convient, et on la tire, si les apôtres chaus n'y viennent.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Et si tu doute que l'os ne se déplace pas, utilise des étais, et place sur la brisure une estelle plus large et plus forte que les autres, et espace chaque estelle de deux espaces, et rende chaque estelle aussi grande qu'elle dépasse la brisure de deux espaces de chaque côté; puis entraîne sur les étais, ainsi comme je l'ai dit au début du chapitre sur le chapistre sur la brisure, plus fort et moins en éloignant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the seat of the stars, and the extraction, as we said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incisions warm, leave it tied until the seventh day, as we said; then examine each .ii. days the thread, so that itching does not spread or come to place, or the new growth cannot come to the member because it is too strained. If it is ordered, as we said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if such an accident does not come, if he does not free it until after three days or more, and the patient lies on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and sets out the shoulder with a plain cloth of even wool, and examines each hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken member does not move, or is not softened by the ligature; if it responds to the power of medicine, and gives him meat as we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle level; and when he begins to recover, let it be thick. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be freed after ten months; and then he must free it and administer baths and medicines of ointments to apply to the joint. And if the stiffness is ugly and hard, let him wait to free it for one day or more.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of 2 bones, which are called the "fociles," one of which is small, and this one extends the fist; and the other is large, and it is that which extends beyond the little one on the side; perhaps the large focile breaks by itself, or the small one, and perhaps they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small focile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is ill, and it hurts more than when they are broken together. If only the small focile is broken, then the proper thing is to extend it lightly, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it is the large focile, then you should strain it more strongly; and extend it on .i. side, and turn the fist of the hand above all the other bones, and the small fingers below all the others, and make the patient cross his arms over himself, and a minister extends one arm to the dislocated part at his side, or at his hip, and another minister at the top; and then he makes him even according to his best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, then each one should be put in its place, and if any of them are loose, then you should hold them with your hand, and you cannot restore it to its place, then you must bend it and the bone. As we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the cauterization there is an ulcer, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; so take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the treatment of ulcers there is an ulcer, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; so take care.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as itching that comes to the member, so it is necessary that you soak the member in warm water until the itching is relieved; and let the member rest without straining it. And then begin again with the cauterization, and if the lacing is soft and the bone has been dislocated, and similar things, then treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the member is too strained, so that it cannot be relaxed, then it is necessary that you soften it a little, and leave it thus for some days, until the tension is relieved, and then apply the cauterization.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Et s’il ne vient aucun de ces choses que nous avons dit à malade, si non le délier jusques à .XX. jours; ou enquintrant, puis li pent les mains à son cou, et soit ses cols égaux, et se garde de mouvement et de déguisement, et dort sur son dos; et saisisses que ceste briseure est rétablie en .XXX. jours ou en .XXXv., et par aventure en .XX. jours, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.
de la brisure de la main	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, unless you release him after 20 days; or when he is in a fit state, then he will hold his hands at his neck, and make his shoulders equal, and keep them from movement and deformity, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is healed in 60 days or 65, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and on both hands there are few fractures, and only a little pain comes;
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or painful, let the patient sit straight and upright with his hands in front of him, equal; then put your hand on an extended cloth, and extend the members of the broken bones, and put them together evenly; and apply plaster and stabs, except for the knuckles, then wrap it in 1.5 yards of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks in the garden behind the plant, then make a rod of drapelz, and instruct the patient that he should pull it out at its root; and then extract it with a long drapeil, and make it straight as the plant from his hand, and extract it, as it comes.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the back, then you should put a stake in, and another above the plant, so that the hand is open and straight, then tie it tightly around the hand, and sewed the ligature between the two hands.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks at one of the two hands, then you should make it even, as it comes; and extract it with the plant, and if you see that it does not move, then raise a small straight stake to lift the break, and do not move it; and if the break is at one of the other two, then make them even, and bind them together, holding them tightly, so they don’t move, or you will strain them, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken shoulder
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the hip are often broken, and we can see it clearly when it turns forward and backward; and the repair is done by bonding above and below the break.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies on his face, then extends each minister [helper] to his side evenly; and it is when the break is made in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the hip, then one of the lines goes towards the knuckle of the hand, and the other goes behind the break; and if it is near the knee, then one line goes down the thigh, and the other up towards the break; and then he places the bone even with his two hands according to its natural form, and then he applies the plaster, and ties it up, so that the blood does not flow.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be left to rest and then return to your work and your treatment; the time has been well spent.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the break. i.e. bandage hard double in .ij. or .iij., and wait for the excess, then turn the leg so that the heels come to the root of the birth, and pour. i.e. thread long between the thigh and the leg, release the knee cap, and bring the chief with the thread above; then turn on the leg and on the thigh the bandage, then put on the break staves, and put a staff on the bone of the leg; then employ the place out between the leg and the thigh of drapes soft to put equal the stretching, then begin to tie in form. iij. twists or iiij. on the break; and as you go more up on the break, and less the stretch; then enter in .ij. threads that you have poured between the leg and the thigh, and lie .iij. staves that are above, then go back to the release at the chief of the thread, until you come away from the foot; and the stretching, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if it comes ne abortion or swelling or other appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if it releases, and addresses that which comes to it, if like we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold, if it is necessary to take them out, if one can; and if one cannot, if it is necessary to split the place, and to draw forcibly; and cure it as we have said, until he is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is broken the thigh in this way that one sets staves, if like in the aid and where arm; however, in this restoration made does not sound the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the wound heals in one day, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	For in the knee joint there is sometimes a little fracture, but it often heals several times. And if it fractures, let it be only a crack or a hole, and not a whole break, because otherwise it hurts a lot.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the restoration be such that what is broken on one side is made equal to it on the other, as much as possible; then put plaster, and put a round stake, if you need it, and fasten it so that it is secure, then give treatment to all injuries as we have said for other fractures, like an ape and others. Put what is right for each accident, until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	That the leg has .ij. bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz" and the others are called "foscile"; and all other breaks are like those of the arm equally, and the work is done in the same way as that of the arm equally, and the dislocations are done likewise.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, so the leg turns round on all sides.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bones are broken, so the leg turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, then you feel great pain and see it clearly; and then turn back to extension. Then extend, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but nevertheless, it is necessary that the break be ugly, and there are many pieces, so the extension is lesser and lighter; and adjust according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take 13. faixes of rope that purple the leg on one side and another, and are long from the knee to the hip until the heel; then wrap them in 13. leus 1. bendeil from above and below, and tie them in the middle, and at this tying no leg shall decline towards the right or left, and so is good; and none administer 1. bers of rope long from the leg, and if it is of rope, and put on the leg to ward off movement, and properly do one on the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there is an abscess or another accident; and heal it as long as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the bone break of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no bone break, but the bones of the foot come in various breaks and positions, and there comes only one break from fire.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones of your foot are broken and you see those bones overtake each other, then place this person down on the ground like they want to walk, and then now put your foot on their own, where the bones have risen up again, press it with all your strength until it comes back to its own place; then put the paste on and stamp it, and put a little plate in the navel of the foot that has 1.5 square inches of plain cloth, then hold it forward, and when you have wrapped the drapes and other things you need around them.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	After three or four days have passed, because you will find the bones even if they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there is one of the two broken, then restore it, as we have said for the hand; and put a stake according to its length on the broken side, and let it be a little wider, then put the little plate on that I spoke of next to the foot, and press it forward; and if there are 1.5 or more, or more, broken ones, then put a stake according to their quantity, wrapped in 1.5 drapes of linen, and press the plate against the navel of the foot; and may it be well under the chief of the plate the belly of the foot is.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget any other things that I have said for the others that break, when we have said it; and assist each injury in any way possible.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the arm bone with the knuckle joint
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the arm bone is fractured with the knuckle joint, if the fair lady is seated upright, then she should be inclined to the back part of the body, and supported from behind; then stuff the socket with cotton, and put in as much as a fist; then let the lady stand up, and touch her back slowly, and then take out the cotton, until it comes into the socket, and set the bone with the fist; and when she urines, if she holds the cotton, and when she has finished, replace it, and so do this. 20 days or more: thus will the fracture be healed, and the lady will be cured, take a bladder of wild boar, and tie a cord to the navel, and pour all the bladder into the socket; then blow into the cord forming a shape, until the bladder is inside: so the socket will come back to life; then stuff it with cotton, and let it be like that for some days, until it has healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the arm bone of the man or woman is fractured, if it is restored as we have said in the book on the femur; and these fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and effort into them, and hear my book. For the fracture symbolizes many things in the right way to restoration: listen to it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the vagina, when it is fractured, take a bladder of goose and pour into the vagina; then wrap bandages around it, and leave it for .iij. days or more, and it will be healed in hospital.
de brisure avec plaie	of rupture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is appropriate for him who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or limb, to be healed now, so that the healings which we have said witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, unless there is a vitriol stain, then you have nothing else, then start to restore the rupture in that very hour, or that day, so that the abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses come, unless you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscesses are calm and you do not touch them nor on the third nor on the fourth day, because you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if his nose is broken, it appears on the cheek, so that you put it with a light hand to your cheeks with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions do not fit your hands to make them equal in length, then take this iron instrument which is 5.6 inches long, and its width is according to the amount of the wound; and for this one is skilled at the miring so that he employs 3 or 4, according to what he needs in each cure of a break; and be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the member when you open it, and be sharp in front and thick in the middle towards the front:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because the bent shoulder should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and it is struck once, as long as it revives, and they are equal to each other. And if the break is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, then you must chop off the head of the bone until the instrument can take it properly.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, then with an appropriate instrument, or scalpel or chisel, in your power; then remove what is left of the bone in small pieces.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the jaw is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural position. If it is in its natural position, then wet it with wine-styptic black, and clean it properly; and do not place wax or anything else on the wound where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption to come forth; then administer poultices when you have restored the jaw, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around according to the quantity of the wound, and be well aware that the wound should not be constricted with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the sick person, or dead or corroding none of them ever; and the extractions are more soft and less sore than those of the other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that bad accidents may come forth, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, then it is not appropriate to place poultices on; but wrap it in place of poultices with hard cloths, and bind them. And when you see after one day or two days that a bow has formed at the wound's edge, then take off what you have placed on it with vinegar, and apply healing ointments, as with four-part herbal ointment and others.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you loosen and re-bind the member three times a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bow can run down leichtly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if someone runs through, and he cannot hold it but returns to its place, knowing that there are little pieces of bone, so you must cut the wound with a knife, and remove all these troublesome pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if a fistula appears at the place or any other corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above. And when the bone is broken and open on the limb, as the bone of the chest or shoulder, and other large limbs, do not pull it out, because many times death comes; but leave it to putrefy; perhaps later. After 20 or 30 days, then cure the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruses that come from the sudor
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the broken one, most especially when it is near the joint, and this is an ugly thing to see in the form of the limb; and by chance cannot make the limbs do their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore that we are fresh: if you administer stinging medicines, as aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocollous substances, such as acacia, and others like them; or do not use any of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine of the stings, or with a lot of honey or oil; and put them on the lump in piles, and bind it well, and do not unbind it for many days; and then unbind it, and start again, until the nodules are hard; or you hold it to a piece of glass carefully made; because the property of glass is that it hardens all the swellings on the limbs; and if the nodule has become hardened like stone, it needs to be opened, so that the surplus appears, or you cut it off with a razor, until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is healed, and the limbs are weak and slender from a variety of causes: either because it was too tightly bound, and was not bound as it should have been; or because it had too many ligatures, and could not receive the blood supply to the member; or because of a great amount of inflammation; or because of too much movement at the wrong time; or because it had little blood in its body, so is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the torso flexible, until the number of sores increases in it; and give him baths, and provide him with pleasure and rest; then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts his great thirst, and pour on it often with fresh water, until the thirst runs into the member; and return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the dislocated limb after the cure
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, however, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish people who say that you must break the member all over again, and many fools have done this in our land; and these treatments are blamed, and great harm comes to them, and perhaps they die; however, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is good that they be soaked in hot water, or with soft herbs that are cooked, such as vismavine leaves, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the fetid substance made therefrom, so as to make an ointment that softens, such as the one made of myrrh well done, and you take the muscovy oil of vismavine, and confound it with lard or oil of seed-cake, and make an ointment thereof; or you take fat figs, and grind them with hay of kolin, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And no bone is kneaded by hand to rub continuously and repeatedly; and make movement of the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if it is twisted and hardened, as it often is in stones, then it must be cut with a small, light knife, and put resin and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back into place, without any delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, and the veins swell up, and by chance one sets them back to their place; for that it is not good to move them when they are swollen: many times causes spasms and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when it comes, treat the disease, and then leave it, until the abscess is calm; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as the injury heals in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the potions for dislocations of the shoulders until the joint is pierced.
des mandibules	the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Now let the jaws be dislocated from above, and the dislocations of both are according to 19 ways: or they are a little out of their places, and soften a little; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the loins, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, and wrap his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocations are small, return them by means of these eight dispositions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly in the hospital, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this manner that the ministers rub the head of the sick person, and pour a little oil from one of his hands on the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, then the dislocation is of 19 parts; and the other two hands should be apart, so that they can move it all around. And command to the sick person that he softens his jaws, and moves them all around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And he makes the wound even, as it comes to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And bring it back with a gentle hand, especially if the two mandibles are together, so that you heat it slightly with hot water and oil, gently bringing it back; do not tarry in bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they have been brought back evenly, and the mouth of the sick person is well closed with a softener, put it on a drape wet with a paste made of oil and wax, then lightly touch it with molasses while it is still warm;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and have his cheeks between 15 inches (the width of the hand), so that he does not move to the left or right, nor make any effort to improve his position, but eat light food, as long as the pains are relieved, and the mandibles are no longer sore;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then if it seems light, and do not work to open the mouth for chewing and drinking, as long as the jaw is well tied and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be brought back to their places in an hour, and are not returned to their places, then there come fevers and normal colds, and by chance intestinal solutions, and by chance vomiting of clear fluid only.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a death sentence; and many times dies he who has it, in seventeen days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the coast down to the extension of the body, and is dislocated several times at the back, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will return; and then put on the plaster and bandage, and tighten it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head which is on the coast cannot dislocate; if not, and if it is dislocated at all times, let him return to his place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient that he rest until he is healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and also here is how to reset the shoulder when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	That the shoulder is dislocated only because of these two ways: that one is dislocated to the part of the socket; and the second is to the part of the bone; and by chance it is dislocated to the upper part, and this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nubs; and many times dislocates out of the socket towards the assembly, however much this hurts him, because at this he will go to hospital; those who have enough money, they hurt themselves, and return hurt.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance there are some people who break or damage, and heat the shoulder with a hot apoplexy, and think that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is then necessary for you to test it, until you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And is recognized the dislocations when it is swallowed toward the shoulder, and makes a difference between the ill and the healthy shoulder, and you will find between them a manifest difference;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and dislocates the shoulder to the chest, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to its side, nor make any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upward, it may be hidden, for you will find it clearly at the chest;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this method of dislocation is not to be used when it is new, or when the patient has become ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister takes the patient's hand up, then places the splint on the armature, and pushes the joint upwards to its place; and the minister takes the hand and extends it upwards, then puts it down; immediately there will be a great deal of movement.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said with the hands two days later, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and the minister should give a softening and soothing infusion, as of alfalfa and fenugrec and melilot in water, and be given;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	and then he should lie down on his back, and place a wooden splint on the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then put the minister's heel on the splint, and pull the patient's hand up;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and other ministers wash out the head of the disease so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns right now, and see how you will remove it according to this way:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and so that you make him present .i. a person who is greater than the disease; and let it be right next to the coast, and press down this shoulder from the back of the disease, and lift up the shoulder upwards so that the disease hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and other ministers pull the hand of the disease downward toward the belly. And if the disease is too light, then put something heavy on it, and let the dislocation return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And the ramie is also done in another way: and it is fixed  .i. a long piece of wood on the ground, whose length is like a pistol, and is not too thick or too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	Then let the patient lie down, but with a sheet over him, and the patient be standing up longwise; then let his hand be extended below another one forming a bridge, and the joint will return to its place securely.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take .i. twig of an arm of great and iii. fingers wide, which has the head turning for muscled bones to enter perfectly dislocated the assele, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then let the head be placed on a sheet, so that it does not hurt the patient, then let it be dislocated the assele of the patient; and extend your arms above the head, and place the shoulder on the arm, and the hand at the head, then place the arm on a block of wood of a certain size, and let it hang by one side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever way it is, then you must put a ball of wool the same size under the assele; then set the plate of powder from the mill, with incense and ambergris, on all the shoulder and around, then draw it out under the assele coming, and tie it to the plate, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands remain in this way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he suck a little while the members are comfortable, for he will heal sooner; and then suck after .viij. days or thereabouts, and move him; and if he is firm and is not softened, then he is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved from its place due to moisture that has come or for some other reason, you must apply the cauterization to three parts, as we have described it before or with the paste of the cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you have done all this, and after .vij. days it slides away, and the joint cannot hold up the arm in its place, then you know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and you know that the joint has not returned to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is to the right of the loins, and the mammary glands, or behind, is made by an impact, and the extension of the hands, and I administer another place; and treat as long as it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing comes greasiness to the limb, and late movement, then the patient uses oil many times until that greasiness is gone, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation from the joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Says that the joint dislocation has been displaced to the extremities, and returns to its extremities; and if it is displaced from all sides, most notably in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for we can clearly see and feel it; and let it be displaced according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, if you can see it openly. For the joint is deformed, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you bring it back in this way as the leg is healed, for if the leg was healed, it would be a grief to bring it back; and by chance cannot be brought back from all and everywhere, most especially when it is at the rear; so much worse than the other dislocations, and is of great pain, and perhaps comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is thus, when it is such that you can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your 2 hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands between the thumb and the finger, from behind and from before, and put the joint back into its wrist together, or at the root of its palm, until it comes back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, bring it back when it doubles its hand back to its hand, and lift up the root of the palm with the thumb which is behind.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not return to its place, bring it back with strong extension; and there are two who extend the arm, and they hold the two ends of a long and wide cloth, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have enveloped a double-cloth long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when he applies his hand to the joint, if he does not rub it with any oil for ease of movement, then tighten the joint properly until it regains its position;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, if applied with dry plaster and tightened properly, and the arm is held at the shoulder of the sick person, and left for a few days, then it is released.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint has set properly in its place, then release the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not set well, then begin again with the plaster and the bandage, and leave it in this way for a few days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels pain after resetting the joint, and it mutates, then bathe and massage it well, and press until it is relieved; or put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then wash and dry it out;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, he gently rubs the joint, then puts the new one on, and then goes in or bath; and so does .ij. times or .iij., until it is healthy; and if you see it, put it on the end of a wet loaf of bread that has been heated, and strain it up; and it will come back to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand is loosened, and the recovery is lighter than that of other joints However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place immediately, when it is loosed, so that the joint may be swollen or an abscess may form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the remapping is that you put the bad hand on a table, and extend its fingers, and look at it so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and squeezes it until it comes back to life.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	All the same, you must make sure it is properly positioned; then place the patient's arm on a table with its hand extended and drawn back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and examine the appearance of the joint; if it returns to its position now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then cut off a piece of flesh from the thumb, and leave it there as a reminder.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back to its position after several days, then let the joint twist.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and is of no use to the patient until his hands are wet, and cannot extract anything at all: so know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; otherwise there is another cause than that of extracting by means of a delicate fire, and possibly nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, put it on the plaster we have said, then extract and leave it there. v.jors, then unstick it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, if the moist heat of water, and rub until it is cured.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two hands.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	None of these are dislocated at all to either side of the hand, none to the back of the palm or to the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then are they two, and press the dislocation towards your knuckles until it comes back, then hold the head of the two together, and push it towards the part where it is connected;
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and then leave it.ij. days, and then make it even again that day; and if it is tight, let it move again, and then hold it in place; and do this often, until it has become loose, so that it does not move again; and then let it rest, and let it heal; and when it is healed,
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same thing if it is dislocated on the palm side of the hand, and do so as you have done before until it is healthy; and do the same thing if it is dislocated from the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Do to dislocation of the shoulder bone at the arm,
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck or shoulder is dislocated, or multiple joints are out of place, without proper treatment, it leads to death quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the excrements come out without control, they cannot be held back, and many times the limbs become weak, or the arms or legs.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the neck becomes mute at three parts; that which is mute at the back is called "gilboize".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	If it is due to a childhood malady, then there is a cure; if not, there will be no cure or recovery.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And those that come from falling down, or from blows, or from similar things, the old manner of curing them with great words has not been of much benefit.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have simplified it according to my intention, and have devised instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the childhood malady that comes before, there is neither medicine nor cure;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also say that it comes straight in .ij. sides, and can not be cured but properly who comes at the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	is that the patient is laid down flat on his back in a long, even position, and has had an extraction of pus so that he does not get bruised;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then put 1. log of fire in the earth at the head, and 1. log by the side, and tie a string over the patient's body at the shoulders, and 1. log between the knees, and 1. log between the feet;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and the two ministers know the strings, one at the head and the other by the side, among the 2 logs;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and are firmly closed, the thread as we have said, and the mirrour puts its palms on the spine, until he revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if he does not recover with this treatment, take a large bowl of two arms long, and cut a hole in the wall, and place the patient on one side, and pour the contents of the bowl over the head, then put the middle of the bowl on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirror's tips on the other side of the bowl, and press firmly until he revives; and if you see this, do it with a ring which turns the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	and put two fire-sticks on the patient's head with a long space between them; and place one hand over each stick, and wrap a palm of space around them.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and let each stick i .e. pine, or it turns over, and are the sticks firmly in the ground so that they do not move, and between each two sticks is one stick turning, for so the bond turns, and let 1 . j . small sticks of a palm long, to turn the bond;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the bond that is between the axles towards the top of the tree, and the other bond towards the pegs at the opposite end, and each of the ministers turns his bond on all the bonds, and the master puts the string even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, put on desicative plaster with a lot of incense, and then the staples, and then the stele of a tablet of 1. iij. feet long, that so he puts the length of the leg of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then the bond of a bond, as we have said, and uses the patient subtle nourishment, until he is healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything comes at the end of health, so administer soft and soothing medicines, with the stele that we have said above; and do not give a piece of silver,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and there is never a appearance in the back of the spine of the backbone, and take care that it is not dislocations; and this is the bone which opens, so that one should not have any presumption: by chance might come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hip joints
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	come only dislocations, and not at all as with the other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to.iiij. parties: inside and outside, and in front and behind; and more inside, and less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is further away, and opens more the legs of the sick man than those of the healthy one, and cannot double his knee on fire;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the limb is swollen with heat due to an abscess, because the head of the hip comes from there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that injury if it goes wrong, is that this accident is opposite to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that injury if it goes wrong, is that his leg is well in accordance with the accomplishment; nevertheless, he does not double himself because of the pain, and if one makes him walk, he cannot walk forward, and holds back his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that injury if it goes wrong, is that he cannot extend his leg, double himself, and his leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place where the ribs are joined.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	If the patient is older and has had previous dislocations, and it takes time to happen, there will be no cure; it is only necessary that he not be presumptuous.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those who have had a fresh dislocation, and there are four kinds of dislocations, if you hurry to put the joint back together, turn it in and out, and move it from side to side; perhaps it will come back into place, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not come back into place in this way, take very strong assistance, and support the leg with two hands or a bandage tied to the knee joint;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and place another minister's hand above it in a way that it presses its hands together, then tie a strong bandage over the shoulder; and another minister should hold his hair;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upward and downward altogether, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains standing.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to all three appearances, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then you must cure the patient's appearance. When the dislocation is in the garden, you must lie on your side facing downward, then bring the bandage to the root of the crotch, and the loop that is away from the anus, then extend the bandage upward toward the anus, and upward toward the thigh;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then have other ministers hold his arms, and embrace the large loop of the crotch, and extend it toward the back form: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot fasten it in this way that we have said, then you must bind the .ij. feet of the patient together with a strong cord beneath the .ij. heels, and above the .ij. knees, and so that the injured leg is longer than the other by .ij. two more.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then hang him by the neck of a mast, and set him on the ground 2 arms' length away; then command 1 minister to embrace the neck of the chest, and let others hang with the patient, who embraces the chest firmly, for now the joints will return to their place without difficulty.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation has returned to its place, so lie the patient, as we have said in that which concerns giddiness, and tie 1 cord properly upon the injured leg, and also upon the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put 2 torches at the head and another one between the feet of the patient; then set a torch between the cheeks of the patient;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and set a wet flag around, that it does not burn the patient, then each minister extends to him, and the doctor sets the dislocation equal to his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put it on .ie. a table, and press it so as we have said in the gibosity, and place the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, extend the leg that is not well far from him, and according to what I have said; and place the doctor's hand on his pain to be under the ill leg, then press with the other hand, and bring it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in the back, extend the leg that is not well far from him, and according to what I have said; and place the doctor' hand on his pain to be under the ill leg, then press with the other hand, and bring it down towards the knee. If the dislocation is in the back, do not extend the patient far, nor raise him on the ground; rather, he should be placed as if he were lying on his side, as we have said for the bed; and place li mires sous lou malaide
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it on his face, and the line extended as we have said above, and must all press upon the joint to the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and will be done when the patient extends his legs, and they will be even; so make sure the feet are fixed, and apply the plaster, and hold it with a bandage, so that the foot does not move;
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for ii or iii days, then remove it, and apply the plaster; and if you see that they are even, stretch them out as before, and leave it. iij days; then remove it, and let him walk about loudly, until the members are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation due to age
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The members are dislocated according to three ways: namely, inside and outside, behind; and not in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are these: instruct the patient that he bend his leg to his knee, and if it does not touch his knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the rehabilitation of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and if he can extend his leg, and place your back on his face, and put his foot on your knees.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee at your palms, and draw back between the two, then bend the .iij. knees from the knee joint; and other ministers extend his foot, until the member returns to its place, and the signs are that he touches his knee lightly with his leg.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and place the plaster on top of it, and make the leg rest in the chest, and join them together firmly .iiij. days or iiij. days, then remove it; and do not work the patient to walk, as long as the limbs are supported.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limbs are not in place, administer stretching strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation at the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is never dislocated, and is never fully displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and try first on the part where it has come out.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	They bring him in if he is light, and they should gently stretch his legs to their hands when he is only slightly injured.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it has come out completely, if it is necessary that you make the patient lie down flat, and you tie him up tightly by the legs, over the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	Then train your feet to your hands, and then to your opposite hand. Then stretch him out, and stretch his legs well;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this 19 times, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, it is good; if not, then begin again the work, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and put a stake firmly into the ground between his buttocks, and tie the sheets around it, so that he does not hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then place the minister's hand on his hip, and another minister extend the foot to his hands or to 1.a. chain, so that he holds it by the collar of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and the stake be next to the hip of the patient to hold it in place while it is being extended;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And then make the dislocated arm equal with his hands, and some other ministers dip the healthy leg in the dung, and the dislocation will come back slowly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is ready, so put the plaster on and press down, and form the strain, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard against the tendons behind the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight;
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then let it be .ij. days or .iij., and if the strain has loosened, then let it be left for one more day, and if it is still loose, go to see the patient every three days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes before that term, it is not yet safe that he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come out, so it is necessary that you calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, until they are well.
des dois	the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, if it is properly extended without work, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in the hip or leg, so it is necessary that you place the patient on their back or on a table all straight, and put your foot on what opens these joints, then press with your foot in this form, until he comes back;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is even, and there is nothing open, so set the foot of the leg on a table at 1.2 degrees, then remove it while forming, and leave it 1.2 days, then let it be; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When the wound comes with the dislocation, and it is reset, many times the patient has died:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you have not used it long, and if you are not compassionate and patient and slow to anger, do not be arrogant:
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things soothing an abscess, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you do not see hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, if I restore now the member to its place, so that the abscesses may come;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the member is in place, then administer soothing ointment to the abscess, and cure the wound, if necessary, with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a fracture with broken bones, and the joints are displaced, do as we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and you keep from entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, because this will cost you much according to your Creator, and for the sake of your arms and your body. Amen.
Explicit le romen de fisique	And let not the fire cautery
