O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, dear sons, I have completed this book, which is the summary of medical science, in its entirety; and I have brought it to an end through its explanations and declaratory sentences.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is done in our region and is strange from all sides, it is a difficult science and requires little time compared to the small descriptions in books of ancient authors that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because there has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed, and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	For it seems to me that I will revive this treatise with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of explanations and declarations and abbreviations; and I will come together with the forms of the cautery instruments, and other tools of the work, with the preparation and arrangement thereof, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that good masters of hands are not found in our land, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who deals with it must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the shape and form and joining together and separation of the bones, and is aware of the nerves and joints and ligaments and the number of joints, and the movement and flow of veins and the rest and birth of limbs.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, as Hipocrates says, what is good with one hand is bad with the other, and what is good to do with one hand is bad to do with the hand that holds it; and most of all in the art of the hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Now we tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not acquainted with the above-mentioned things should be careful not to make mistakes and not to harm people; so I have often wished that many of those who deal with this science would abandon their knowledge and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a fool of a man who cut an abscess from the scrofula on the neck of a woman, and he cut the arteries of her neck; for so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another fool who tried to cut a stone out of a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took a piece of the bladder with him, and he died in three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already seen one who was called in to treat it, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he tried to treat him, he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another fool who took in our duke's leg which was broken, and with the break there was a wound; and the ignorant doctor pulled the break on the wound to the point of pain, and left it without a bandage, and left it so; and he ordered that it not be removed; and it delayed until the whole leg became gangrened, and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to dislocate the leg; and when I did so, he was in peace and felt no pain at all.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But any way that corruption came to the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until all members were lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wonder that broke out into an abscess filled with putrefaction, and then Inflamed by the evil of its own virulence.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chancres, when they are purifying with melancholy humor, come not except that one touch them with iron if it is not in the right place where one can entirely cut off what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, very fine children, you should know that the work of the hands is divided into two divisions: namely, those in which there is danger in many ways; and I will show in each of these in this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For for that it is needed that you keep them, so that the young man does not speak ill of you; if you take your weapons in harmony, and undertake your patients lightly but firmly, and use the better way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be free; and leave behind probable diseases of grief health; and hold your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiën said in some of his admonitions: "Do not take on the care of a bad disease, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and water-based medicine, and the order of the limbs; and the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and all that is necessary in this work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are of dislocation and the tools for it, suction cups and wounds, extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are ordered and the shapes of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered that the heads of the tools be cut off as soon as possible, and the shapes of the instruments are given.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work, it is necessary that I give the quality of the help and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of help and harm is the longest word and subtlest science and the most complex answers; and many wise men would speak on this, and agree with it; and I am short on words because I shorten them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the universal help of all colors or matter, except for two types of color: that is to say, hot color with matter and dry color with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions together matter, some devised and said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery does not worth to diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire if it is hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from heat, nor by dryness; and he who said that cautery makes great help to hot and dry disease which comes in courses of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it never once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all way, nothing is as good for it as he who has experienced it, and who knows by long use the paste of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the season and space thereof; of other complexions we have no fear, even if it be a cold and moist disease.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them were to come together and agree with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery is better if it comes out of the cure, and of greater goodness than medical fire cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and comes only to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member at all.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines come from one member to another by removal, and cause disease of great healing; and perhaps fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not hurt if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And what I have found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the truth of things; and because I am sorry for the length of speech, for it does not please me to keep you from the secret which has been answered in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; take it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that it is necessary to agree on what time should be used for the fire cauterization, and let them be made.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all seasons, because the harm that may arise is prevented by the aid of cauterization; and most especially, the cauterization is for necessary pains that cannot be waited for the time when greater grief may come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And I do not think at all, dear son, as they say the foolish people; for with the illness that is cured by cauterization there is no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is nothing more than a medicine that changes the appearance, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is worth more as a medicine due to its quick effect, and for its virtue and excellence.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And a possible thing is that the disease comes according to the complexion of the patient and the place of the illness and its virtue; and excesses are assembled in him by acquiring meat and similar things, unless fire cauterization is administered at the place where he has little surplus and moisture, as with fire cauterization for pain, and similar things, and partial pain does not return again; but that happens a little.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	And so open well that the cauterization is of medicine, not because of the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that the cauterization instrument of gold is more healing than that of iron, and they said that fire-iron was only used because of its quality of gold and for its high substance; and they said that the heat of the cauterization does not cause pustules, but this is not true because I have tried it, and found that it is true in some people; and a cauterization of gold is more healing than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And moreover when you heat the gold instrument, you are not so when it is heated by the color of gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it will go into the fire, and in this way there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cauterization, which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	For in this chapter on the treatment of headaches, I will instruct you on how to do it correctly so that it is easier for you to find the right spot.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cauterization: For the treatment of headaches and the relief of pain in the head, ears, and teeth due to various causes, including cold and湿气/humors (i.e., excess moisture or dampness), as well as many other diseases caused by cold, such as paralysis, lameness, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The method for this cauterization is as follows: The treatment for the headache and pain in the head, ears, and teeth should be done with a medicine that dissolves and washes away the head pains or three [3] or four [4] times, depending on the nature of the disease and the patient's tolerance and custom. Then, re-apply to the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the fire on the cross between your hands, and put his hands on his chest; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between its two eyes; and leave the two hands come, so it bleeds from the nose then heat the fire called "oliver", which is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then place the fire on the cross between your hands, and put his hands on his chest; after that put the root of your palm on the root of his neck between its two eyes; and leave the two hands come, so it bleeds from the nose then heat the fire called "oliver", which is the form: And let it rest in ink for a while, and slowly extract your hand again and again; then release your hand completely, and find the small bone at the top; and if you don't see it, then restart the fire until you see the bone as I told you; after that take a piece of string, and put cotton wet and soft inside, and put on the fire, and let it be there for three days; after that put cotton drenched in oil inside; and let it be there until it burns; then treat the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And they said to me, The longer the wound remains open, the more it will suppurate; and for this reason if it is healed with a poultice.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said to me: Let the cautery remain applied so long that part of the bone be burned; and then remove what is burned from the bone, and let it be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another said to me: Let the cautery remain applied so long that it burns as far as the bone, and then remove it as far as the humor comes out; and one should let the wound remain open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and dress it.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of applying the fire seem good to me neither for all nor for all men; and they seem to me that I should let it remain applied; for the head is weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we testify in other limbs; and yet more so when the head of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first impression of the fire seems good to me and gives a sort of relief, and I use it in such a way that it seems salutary.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When all the head comes to chronic pain and lasts a long time, then use herbs and pills called "cochier" and head purgation and oils and plasters; and if you do the fire cautery that we have just mentioned, and it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of a strong nature, and that he is not too cold; then cauterize him slightly as we have just mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have made the fire cautery on each horn of the head as we have just mentioned, and you have made the cauterization at the root called "vasselz"; and place the cupping vessels; and adjust your hand so that you do not see the bone: the patient will feel a lot more intense pain during this cauterization than during others, which I will speak about later; and it is right that the cornes cauterizations be smaller than those with which we cauterize the hair of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain and is stretched out to the oil, and the head is purged with medicinal herbs, and other cures have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and none of them profit: then make cauterization according to two ways, that is to say, with medicinal water and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery: If you squeeze a little bottle of oil, and peel off the skin and re-apply it to the wound at the base, and then let it rest for twelve hours or more; and then release it and treat with garlic, and leave the wound for two or three days; and then put cotton dipped in wax on it until it heals.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the cure of injury as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this one of some burning medicines that I have written or dosed in the treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery, if it is done in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery so that it is hot:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "close" because the head is made in the form of a clod or there is I little curve, and in the middle to a small appearance; and put it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, until half of the pain of the keur is burned; and remove your hand that the artery does not burn, which is gone, and runs a lot of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in silk, and put it on the place for three days; then I put moistened cotton in butter, and then cure the place of injury as long as it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cautery that is called "cutelare", all over its tip, and be careful not to plug the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of headaches
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headaches as we have already said in the division of diseases, and do not benefit from it, and see that the cauterization before mentioned with medicine and iron does not suit him, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and thus sign over the place of pain a line half a inch long, and hold your hand there once, and draw back so that you do not cover the artery and do not come up to the bone; and guard against the mandible that moves when you chew, and let the rustiness of the blood of the artery remain that it may be drawn back, or drawing back give great fear and especially to one who does not know it, and who is a student and untried; and leave the work half done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is clamped, and I will show you where it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	Et si tu vois que ce cautère ne suffit pas à la maladie, et que le patient souffre, appliquez le cautère au niveau du cou comme nous l'avons dit, et guérir la plaie jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit saine; et si tu vois, administre le cautère que nous avons dit ou chapastre de l'extraction de l'artère, avec le cautère qui a deux coutelz; et c'est ce cautère est meilleurs de celui et plus aidants.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice to the disease, and the patient suffers, apply the cautery at the level of the neck as we have said, and cure the wound until it is well; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapastre of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery which has two blades; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear from cold, and one has applied liquid medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not cease, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", of which form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing all around the painful ear, where it hurts on both sides, and moving away a little from the root of the ear since you have found the place of pain; and having pierced each ear nine times; after that treat the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	torture must be cured by cautery is only effective for those that move with fluid, as we said in the division of diseases; and not to do any cauterization on the similarities that come from dryness and waste of heat.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this torture of fluid movement from the throat and gargling and spitting, and this does not help, then it is appropriate that you cauterize the pain in three places: one at the root of the ear, and another a little farther away from the temple, and the third between the lips; and apply the cauterium to the part which should be cured until half of it has burned; and this is the form of the cauterium:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the surgical knife that we have put before you is a little more subtle and it is necessary for the knives to be a little larger; after the treatment, take care of the wound as I said above until it is well.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: II on the two horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I cauterize what is called "vessel" as we have said before, and then cauterize behind the mouth of the stomach; and treat it as we have said above.
de litargie	of lime
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This is a disease that requires the patient to take large pills and pour oil on the brain; after cutting off the head of the patient completely, and putting on the occiput the resin of saffron which is written or used for making plasters; and this is the way of cauterization: do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy then it is good; and if it is not, three fire cauterizations on the head at the base, with two-inch space between each, and two ounces of gros in the middle; and cure as for others, and if he twitches, the patient suffers, one cauterization in the middle; and it is necessary to make two others on the two horns, and cure until it is healthy; and let the cauterizations which are called 'olive' be made as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be washed and that what we have said before be followed; then the head of the patient is cauterized, and one cauterization on each horn, one behind and three on the spine at the back of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease persists, then three cauterizations are made on the spine at the base of the spine; and he leaves it until the fire on the last cauterization is extinguished, and he relaxes his hand; then the cure until it is healthy, and let the cauterizations which are called 'olive' be made as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Of epilepsy: One should not resort to fire cautery except for those who are febrile; it is necessary first to clean the skull and to administer other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and the patient suffers from fever.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot bear the pain: make them gargle and chew, cleaning the skull often with good meat; then put the head in the middle, and apply the cautery according to what we have said above, and also on the neck and back spine, and treat as described for one who is paralyzed and has stiffening of the joints.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is a child: apply the subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excess fluids or腐敗和厚密的湿润物，then half-heat cautery as we said before to the one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	When due to melancholy, there is a declining of excess fluids into melancholy, and the patient's body is moistened, then give him to drink something so that his brain may be purified, according to what is before it in division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After re-erecting the head of the patient; after making a well-formed turban out of linen, as well as a circle, place it on the head; and let the patient sit comfortably with his back well supported; then present the liniment, and dampen it with old almond butter; and heat it gently over fire so that he may bear it; after emptying the circle from inside the turban, and letting it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with another good government, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And so you see how to cauterize him by making many punctures all over his body.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cauterization moistens the skull and then puts cotton wetted with butter and linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the hair
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes first to the hair by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do this to the patient purifying thing: wash or bath many times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that he commands him to shave his head, and does the cauterization on his head, and does two cauterizations on the temples because they are desiccated: one where the hair is shaven and one where it remains; and be careful about the blood coming out, and if you see too much blood come out, then stop him with a cloth so that he doesn't burn himself.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery how to stop it; and no one does a cauterization or haematoma of the two hind bones.
dou cors des larmes	the cor of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or extract the arteries which are in appearance at the top of the head; and one can see that it is the cold, phlegmatic, superfluous fluid, therefore let him do the cauterization I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes: I cauterize the top, and two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations where he haired out the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes bloodlessly above the eyebrow at every small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	the cor of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you use the medicines according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit, then you take three cups of the medicine for the sick; after that he lifts up his head, and makes a fire cautery on the middle of the cautery olive; and make two cauteries from the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two places, a little shaved on the hair; and guard the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	This is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cauterization with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	from this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you do two cauteries on the two places as long as the hair are; and do not let your hand off until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	Dou hair that points to oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time has come when the hair of the oils is converted to the parched, and they pinch the oil, and one does cauterize according to two ways: that is to say, by fire, or by fiery medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pinch at their base, hold them steady so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your care; then sign on the paper of the hairs a figure which is also like the fuel of the mirth, and is the beginning of the signature of the hairs; then put cotton wet in pitch and musk of persillion on the oil, then heat the cautery so that it is this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the wound little by little several times so that the scar is burned in place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper withdraw, and the hairs rise to the length of the oil; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton wet with ointment in the wound as long as the scarring is finished; after the healing care until he is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that come the hairs, and the paper is softened then begin again the cauterizing on that middle point, as you did first; and if the hairs are missing, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural length, and even, and do not touch the hair oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medical remedies are: that you command the patient to leave the hairs as long and even as they grow, then make of parchment the form of the leaf of Myrrh; then take of French soap and of hot salt, each a .Z., and grind them together well; and do it promptly, so that it does not cool down again, then pour on top of the parchment the eyes; and if the illness is in only one oil alone, then you must also work on the other side as well; and moisten with cotton the ointment wet in the jar; and the patient's joint shall be in your health and place your two fingers on the medicine, and press it little by little each time the patient feels the tingling of the medicine, for he feels the tingling as well as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	Once you have finished, take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the medicine is over, take off the bandage and see if the paper has risen as if it had been lifted by fire or by incisions; and if so, then do well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put more medicine on the bandage where the medicine has not worked, until your hairs are even and at their tips; then put cotton wetted with burre on it as long as the sores burn, after treating the place that is called "dyafenis" and others, until they are well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to, protect your wound from the medicine by a bandage so that it does not move away from the medicine by the hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft again and the hairs grab at the oil, start the medicine on that same bandage that has been softened by the paper properly, just as you did before; after treating it until it is well; and this is the form of the medicine of lead:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to what you should be restrained; and do not answer the right way to those who are subject to this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your hands; and wipe his hair with a damp cloth or with juice of peppergrass on oil; then heat the cauterizer accordingly: and apply it to the hair at the base, so that it forms a little peak like the shape of a feather, join the two peaks together, and if you see any blood, let it flow; but certainly, the one who applies it must be careful for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Aprés presse la fistule s'ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s'ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l'oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l'oil, et la corromp.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	After pressing the fistula, open it and treat the pus and dry it up; and if it is closed, then operate and cut deeply; after that, place a hot cauterizer firmly on the skin over the oil, and let your hand stay on the cauterizer over the affected area from above the oil, so that your hand does not go wild; and place the cauterizer in the grease of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cauterization again once more, and if you need to do it again, leave it for III days; after that, put cotton wet in butter on it, and treat with drying medicine until it is healed, and if forty days have passed and it is not healed, then put corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered; and follow up according to what came out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way to cauterize a fistula which none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	When you see a fistula, cut it; then put in the cut a fine string so as to make it form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I have it at the amount of one .Z. of liquid; and hold your hand tightly so that the patient does not move, so that the melted liquid does not run to his oil; and you must put cotton moistened in alcohol on the oil at the base of the fistula, or on the skin: the liquid if it is well applied to the place of the fistula, and he heals with a wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	If the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then he should administer piercing to the nose, and bring back the fistula to the nose's own place according to what it is necessary in his own place.
des crevaices en levres	In the crevices of the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Mouths sometimes have crevices in the lips which are called "hair", and most often in the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these crevices according to what we have said in the division, and the cure does not help, then heat a small surgical scalpel according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it firmly in the crevices as much as it will go; then cure with oil of wax until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess from the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When the abscess comes up in the root of the throat or in the palate or at the roots of the teeth, after having made the pus run and it dries up and becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help: then you must have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having sealed or pierced the fistula, and keep your hand until the iron comes out at the bottom of it, and do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in the treatment, until it is healed; and if it is healed in this way, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the place and remove the rotted bone according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	Dou movement des dens.
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	The movement of the teeth. When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, treat it with medicines; this does not work, so put the head of the sick person in your lap; then heat the cautery until its form comes out like this in a certain way that you put a string on the tooth; and place the cautery very hot inside, and hold it for as long as your hand allows the sick person to feel the heat coming from the root of the tooth; then let go of your hand and start the cautery according to your will; then fill the mouth of the sick person with stale water, and leave it there for an hour and wash it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In this way, the tooth that was moving is stabilized, the gums are made firm, and the moisture that causes decay is dried up.
de la dolor des dens	of the teeth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain from cold comes with frostbite or there is cold and wet, and the remedies of medicines are not useful, then it is necessary to cauterize according to two ways: and cautery with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautery with butter: if it is such that you squeeze butter from a cow's udder, and the tip in a copper or bronze spoon; after take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, and the wet in butter, and put on the hurting tooth carefully and hold for as long as it cools down; and do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see the wool and cotton wet in butter, and put on the hurting tooth, and put on I bronze hot as long as the fire comes to the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Cautery with fire: if it is such that you squeeze a metal bar, copper or bronze, and it is thick so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient; after heat the cautery, for in this way it will form soon, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be worse the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cautery, and then he eats it quickly; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterization with the hair of the head that you will want, and according to what you have power; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold moisture and does not obey the digestion by medicines, then heat the head cautery so that after it comes the form, and has II openings for the fumes to rise up at the cautery from the other side; and put the cautery hot on the abscess once, where it needs to be, until it comes to the root of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus III days; and put cotton wet with butter as far as the burning is done; after treat the hole with garlic and tar until he is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails on the tonsils of the throat, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by solvating medicines; afterwards he makes cauterization at the root of the throat, and you must not come up to the throat, and dare only a little taste.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards he makes another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clave" so that we have the form in front of us; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the throat are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or thirst, and the disease is old, then he makes ij cauterizations on the neck according to the form which we have said before; and another cauterization milks between the breasts; and let the cautery which is called  "clave" be made according to the shape that is in front.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a fire cautery by poking at all the spots called "pins" of which the shape is as described above in the ear disease; and the pins are up to 30 or so in number, with no more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the wound according to what is described above for this ear disease, and the cauterization is done with three raies according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those spots that are lighter in color, you should do three of them together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, massage the patient on his back and sides; then lift up the collarbone with your right hand; and if the joint moves inside, then heat the fire cautery in two places according to this shape:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the wound until it reaches the rib, and the shape of the cauterization with the same cautery has four cauterizations; and because this is done with the cautery that has three edges, the nerves are cut according to the thinness of a thread, and the form of the cautery that has three edges.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never is applied on this nerve for there are eight cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the powder on the cautery, grind it with salt; then let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well healed.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated from above, let this thing happen little by little; then make the cauterization with the thick cautery, or many cauterizations by piercing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed from the bone and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and moisture until he was taken out of his complexion, and are multiplied to him the catharsis, and the ways of cures accustomed and he does not benefit, then it comes that the patient is sovined on his back, and extends his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Therefore after him do three cauterizes I burn the skin of the back per the quantity of two, all cauterize clavile, and two cauterizes defuers the two sides as much as the shape of the cauterizes is at three angles, and there is a part between the one and the other that they are not joined together when they go corruption; and be the cauterize so perfect that it blisters both parts, and the figure of the cauterizes according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterize of a great cauterize in the stomach according to this form; and who has fear of this cauterize, cauterize by poking and signing on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you saw in cheek; then the cauterize is at all the cauterize which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment for the disease that we have had before, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Regarding the liver, when there is pain from cold and moisture and strong wind, as long as it is removed from its natural state by excesses; and the patient is treated for what we have said in the divisions, and he does not benefit from it if he is stubborn about his food; and the sign of three cauterizations according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, let go of the joints from which the cut comes; and leave a space between each cauterization the size of two fingers; and let the cauterization of the long neck of the torso, and do not press your hand too hard on all the cauterization; and let it be burned with moderate heat, and let the patient lie down on his back; and if he cannot, then let him stretch his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauteries of the cuttlefish, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all of it, for you would parch all of the body; and let it come no further than a pimple, for the cure is very subtle at this place, and the wisdom to see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can know if it is in the par or in the cloth: if it is in the par, then feel that the patient feels pain not too much; and if it is in the cloth, then feel great pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then when this cure has ended the blisters, let the patient be silent on his head; and then sign with your finger where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterizer which looks like a raygun, for that is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I the cautery as long as the burn is hot, and come up to syphac, as long as the pus is all dried; after the cure according to the cure of the sores until he is well; and it does not need but this cautery use no fire that those who have studied medicine long time, and by which hands these diseases have corrupt any time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can begin to work, and I think it is better that it should be left alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	For the pleurisy cautery The ancient ones said that one must make a cautery of the roots of aristo Logue, and in this way: Take a root of aristo Logue that is long, the longest you can find, dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your two hands; and moisten it with oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize between the breastbone and the collarbone, and II small cauterys a little down in the part that is sore on the beard; and cauterize between the fifth rib and the sixth, by declining behind a little; and I cauterize under the breast, and I another one over the stomach, and I between the shoulders, and II make two cauterys back from the breast, the one between the shoulders. And do not press your hand, but open it widely as when you are smelling something.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no elder said that any man uses fire cautery like a razor, and blows it and puts it between the ribs, until it comes to this aposteme; and he jumps for pain, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes out that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse from what we have said about the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they have three ways of fire cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one way is that you make three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cautery, and let the mouse rest on his back; and another way of cautery is that you heat the cautery that has two sides, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the scar that is at the place of the mouse, or the cut comes towards the left, and let the elevation that you feel with the scar according to the scar, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you put the two men to bed and they can no longer be heard on the other side, then treat with fire, and so on there will be three. And if you see it, then treat with fire all three.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has gotten worse over a long time, and this is evident before the other one mentioned.
de ydropisie	dropy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Does not suit for dropy, except by the way called "ascleotes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the ways we have spoken of in the divisions, and your cure does not benefit from it, then you must make four cauterizations around the body, one on the belly, one on the liver, one on the kidney, two behind the back along the spine, and one on the penis; and let the cauterizations be close to the skin of the patient.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the fire cautery go for to get rid of long and tenous purging, and do not leave the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hurry, and the two intentions will come together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is the key that we have in front of us, and according to what it is, it will be olive-shaped.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the pieces
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the pieces are swollen in those who are hydropic and are pale yellow, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and the middle finger; and gently lift your hand with the cautery without returning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far in all cases, otherwise it would force the yellow pus, and do the cauterization according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After you have done with the two legs, make two cauterizations in each leg at the tip of the scrotum; and let the cauterization be long, one on the outside of the thigh before, and the other behind it, alongside the leg; and leave the cauterizations in place for a long time without treating them, since they will do so themselves; after you have done this for one leg, then go on to treat the others as we have said.
de la menoison	of the dungeon
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the water in the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and beneficial virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are afflailed, and cannot be treated by any means of treatment; and you see the sick person suffer greatly and of great virtue, so make a great cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken about it before, or a cauterization of the stomach, circulating; and four cauterizations around the navel finely, at every cauterization nailed finely, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make a fire cautery on his hand, and I make a cautery on each finger, and II small cauteries on the stomach of him who has much, because the cure is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are old and have large cold, damp,腐った腫れ、そしてそれらは私たちが上記の章で言ったように治療されている場合、火の cauteryは役に立たず：I背中の中ほどに cauteryを施し、三角形の形をして少しずつ切り落とし、IIの cauteryを同じように行い、もしあなたが考えて、患者の胃が冷えているなら、肉は煮えず、顔が膨らむことがわかったら、それなら我々は前にも述べたように胃に1つの cauteryを行い、肝臓にIつの cauteryを行い、そしてまた我々が前に言ったように鼠道全体を cauterizeする。そして cauteryを長く開いておきなさい。
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment, let him rest as long as he is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the flesh which is called "thelol
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the flesh, if it is heated, put the fire-cauterizer on it and let it burn until it reaches the root of the flesh; then treat with oil that helps until it is healthy; and if you treat with a large cauldron, do so once or twice, and if there is much flesh, cauterize it as we have said; after treating with beneficial oils as long as they are healthy; and if you treat with a large fire-cauterizer on the flesh, it will be more helpful.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound that has been ill-treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear a cut or an opening, which we will describe in our own way, there comes a disease that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no vent in the fistula, and it wakes up and gets putrid and corrupted moisture, then you should provide an all-encompassing subtle tent, and remember that you know how much it has of perfection.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After warming the cauterizer that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and starting over with the cauterizer until the corrupting and rotten flesh is burned, once or twice, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and be careful of the nerves that are inside, and great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes into the body of the belly and the intestine, then be careful of these veins, and do not make a cut except in the flesh, and think that it is not useless; after treating the part until it is healthy, and if the veins are broken, and the matter is dried up over a long time, then know that the vein is completely healed; and if the matter is not dried up, know that the vein is three-quarters healed, and the bone is corrupted at its base; and so as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the kidneys and great windiness comes on, and does not take hold of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a cautery on the kidneys from one side to the other at the clavicle cautery which we have before mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizes in a line, and greater help will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from pain and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then you make a cautery on the back part of the bladder, where the hair grows on the tip of the penis, and one on each side, and each so long as an inch; and you make another cautery behind, where you need it; and you make the cauterizes clavicular according to the form before mentioned.
de la marris	from the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare is cold and damp, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and late in blooming; and when they do come, then there is great pain: therefore it is necessary that you make three cauters around the udder, as we have said above in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauters on the back; and let the cauters be heated, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the haunch
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint pocket, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints are found to be hot, then you must cauterize the patient on the hip joint pocket with a circle-like cauterizing iron, and mark in front of the joint inside the circle as it moves back; and if so, let the cauterization be such as that which we have described for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have the fire cautery, then make III cauteries from the large olive oil, and let the cauterization be perfect as all the courses; and treat until he is well.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the box of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purges the patient of the large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that you make the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is according to many methods, some of which are: you make three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and you make them deep and large, and there is between each cauterization the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauterizations be olive oil; never do a cauterization in the middle on the top of the hip, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, whether the fire cautery at the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in a different way that the circles contain all the hip, and all the skin of the cure is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way that is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not reach up to the thigh or up to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain comes up to the thigh and leg, then do II fire cauteries at the place where the patient says that the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle three times on the left side; and let the cauterization be scalded, and let the skin of the cure be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two or three toes or near the ankle, then cauterize at the point where the pain is III or IV times with the fire cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	Et si tu veux être un bon guérisseur, fais-le avec soin; et s'il souffre d'une douleur à l'intérieur du genou qui irradie vers la cuisse, applique un cautère à l'aide d'un couteau ou d'une pince, et prends bien garde à tous tes cautères pour ne pas en laisser échapper un qui brûlerait les nerfs et les grandes artères, et ne causerais ainsi au patient une souffrance et une contraction importantes.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	I have also seen many who made a cauterization on the foot's arch, letting it go so long that the leg was completely twisted, and the toes too, and became pierced and腐腐したすべての toe.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	Après une solution abdominale dont il est mort.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	Et si le douleur est en deux parties ensemble, fais un cautère dans chacune d'elles, selon cette manière.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	Et le sage dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l'un entrechetres jusc'a l'autre d'espaice la quantiteit d'un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c'est li forme:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the sages said in the cauterization of the hinch, since this is the way, make it such a bar and be at the top as well as thick as a nail, or a little less, and be between chetresses and be from one chetresse to another of space the quantity of a nut; and let the chetresses come above from both sides, and also be like nails, and I have a lot of good made iron; and this is the form:
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its heat, and few who use it; but this is a good cautery which can bear it, and leave it where it afflicts.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medicine cautery that burns well, make a tool with an opening at the edge of the door, and it is either made of brass or iron to one side, and in height it has two of us, and each of them is wide to this quantity of the thickness of two fingers; and may be opened up and down, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After putting on the bag over the hip of the lying-down patient on his side, and pressing your hand well up against the bag; after pouring in between the two circles of hot water that has been heated by the fire a little while, and leaving it for an hour, allow the pain and burning sensation to the patient.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, then you make the instrument smaller according to what you have done in the hip joint plus; and this is the way of hot wax, and I wrote it and treated it for the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and live charcoal, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them into a nine-part pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Or take a small space somewhere that the point of one scalpel can enter; and put that pot on top of another well-lined pot, and put alkaline and charcoal and warm wax on it, as much as you need to cover the two powders when you shake them up in your hand; and let it be like that until it has dried out a little water and wood, then take all that wax, and spread it over the charcoal and over the alkali just as it was before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it is moist and amenable to the work of medicine and other cauteries Because she does this operation like fire, and with other medicines which cauterize well the knee here as thyme and honey of the acorn tree and calce with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galileo tells us of a cure in which an honourable man was cured of the pain in his knee and sciatica, and he was very wet, and said that no other cure was made, and that he was cured at one go when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as it is taught here after.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you grind the green lime very fine and dry, and mix it with a little fat, and put it on the knee and thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it rest; and let him be for three hours, and by the quantity so that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then put him into a bath as long as his body is a little awake, and let him lie in the water, and the pain will all go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery with these medicines, unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Diascorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with the end of a goat's horn, it helps much; and the cautery must be done in some such way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and rub it with old oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the hand and the other that is called the palm.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After take a piece of dried goat's horn, and hold it in the fire until it is full of charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it stops hurting; and then do it again, and never stop doing it as long as you think that it comes up to the knee, and that the pain has stopped; and this way of cauterizing is called "goat's horn cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of two
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from sitting down or from impact, or from excessive evacuation, or from the appearance of expanded cold matter, no one of these appearances is worth the cauterization, unless it comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary that after this, the patient is voided of foul pills or other appearances, that a line is made on the back at the place where the pain is, three lines with an inch apart, and in each line V cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauterization be done according to the cauterization that is called 'point'; and if you see, do III cauterizations or IV at the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often occurs in small children, and the signs of its onset are that they become constricted when they stand up, and they are afraid; and you find in the last spine at the back, and in us there is an appearance that comes on the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you want to cure him, cauterize him with fire according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	Burn each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, burn inside the spine with a sharp fire that is two or three lines long, and let the burns be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, cure the area until it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply fire to gangrene which is in the spine of the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When there is pain in the joints due to moisture that spreads to each limb, and when pain comes in pieces, what is called "podagra" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicines, then it is cured with fire in this way: Make the fire cauterization around the joint of the foot, and let the fire be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary that you touch the face of the foot, then make a fire cautery to all the fire cauteries that are claimed "zero".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come only to the genitals and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each kneecap three cauteries or four of each part, at all the olive cauterization; and if you need more, do so, but do not hold your hand too long except when the skin of the heel is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend only to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we have spoken about in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then do not enter more than two lines; and if there is still pain in the two joints and the hair of the hand; and if the pains come only to the wrist or only to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and well govern the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this well and you purge the phlegm, you will be healed by God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	for the cut of the surgeon
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the cut has come to a halt and the bleeding has stopped, and you have healed him with your hand, let him not move that day; and he should use things that cool his belly, so that the end [of the cut] drops from his belly; then he shall sit down upon his back between your hands, and command him to wet his hair as long as the cuts are healing, and bring them to your two hands, and sign of one side of the cut upon the bone of the finger, and at all a form like half a circle overhead; then heat the fire of which is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and drops slowly.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then return the balls to their place; and let the minister dry his hand so that it does not turn back; and work well on the legs of the patient, and put a towel on him and an iron on his legs, and another on his feet which dry his hands; then set the cauterizer on his bone with your whole hand, and hold it straight and as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful that the ball does not slip when you make the cauterization; so you do not burn it; and that by this the patient does not die, or any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cauterizer, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterizer of children be subtle according to their measure, and of grown-ups too great according to their measure; after III days cure the place of the cauterizer of butter until the heat subsides; after the cure of other medicines until he is well, and let the patient lie on his back for XX days until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his bandages be kept on for a long time, so that the ball does not slip when he gets up to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a well-made strap is provided for him and it is carried for another 40 days; and let there be good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too much loud speaking; and when he does this instruction, he is completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the cure of his shoulder in his paint.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When the ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make a cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third part of the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancient ones say that it must be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the place of the incision and make a line across the width of the rupture, and another on either side, and all your hand holds fast to all the cauterized spots.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and milder.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any member, or from a bruise or a wound, and this pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not help it, then it is necessary that it be cauterized at the fire that is called "poins", and be the cauterization according to the length of the member and its smallness and its feebleness and its virtue and its location from torments and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is well after the first cauterization, it is good; but if not, then you must apply another cauterization to that one, for it is necessary that he be well who is nearby; so you must apply the cauterizations until the patient is well.
de meselerie	of slumber
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mesail are helped by cauterization with great help, and least of all does the disease come from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s'ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l'autre vers lou front a la fin des chevois; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haitrel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc'a l'os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s'en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu'il est devant.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Now, see to it that the patient lets the hair grow long and even; and if they itch, apply heat to relieve the itch, but do not scratch too much for fear of causing injury. For in this chapter we will speak about how to treat many diseases with fire cauterization: at the beginning of an illness, how to use it to cure a person, and how to avoid causing pain and damage; and how to apply cauterization to different parts of the body, including the head, neck, back, shoulders, arms, legs, hands, feet, and joints. And be careful not to apply fire cauterization to certain bones or organs, or too much heat may cause injury; and do not scratch too much for fear of causing pain.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I make a fire cautery, the more aid I give, and profit from it; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterization as the healthy do, because his body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the fire cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, cure the face with flour mixed with honey and other cures until it is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes in any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healthy, then make a fire cautery on the member according to its size; and let the cauterization be only a little bit inside the curve of the cure; then heal it with ointments until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never does one make cauterization by the hand and at the foot and at the back, to the exit of a nerve that silences the limb, and thus if it is bone, it swells; and however, no one gets in there if he does not know the limbs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
de albaras	I am unable to translate this line as the text seems to be incomplete or corrupted. Please provide more context or the full text to ensure an accurate translation.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" has come on, and the medicine's power is lost, then cauterize with a perfect fire according to the quantity of the spittle of the cure, until the blenchour is healed, and its color changes; then treat it with flour of rice and lentils, mixed with oil of roses and leaves of plantain, and hawthorn, and each part has a portion; and all are mixed together, bound with a bandage, and applied to the affected area until it is cured.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for leprosy through fire cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leprosy begins to appear, and you see it stopping, if the cautery is done with fire that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the leprosy.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet another says that one should also make the cautery in the middle of the leprosy; and yet another does not seem right to me, for I am afraid that it will become ulcers and rotten, and I have never seen this done; and yet a more correct thing is that it be cauterized all around, with the fire that is called "a circle," as we have said in many cauterizations.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the poison that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have a disease called "adubelati," and it takes long to die or because of the wastefulness of the disease or because the person is too old and has little blood, or because of age; then let them die quickly: then cauterize them all around with small cauterizations by poking; then let it be like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Because she is hurrying towards death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see her pierced at all the fire, so hot is the fire of which this form is made:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease called 'adubelati' as long as the fire has pierced the course, and make such fires that the patient feels the heat in some way so that the course of decay is recognized.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the cure, as long as he is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire with iron:
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another form of disease called 'corrodens', which is nothing other than a swelling of the member, for it swells the members as much as the fire dries up the wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in its early stages that can be cured by fire together with nails, then heat the small and large nails according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after being cauterized on all sides until all corruption has disappeared, and nothing remains of it, so that whatever is corrupted is taken away.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave him for three days, and put on the burned areas oil to suffer with pain until the burns from the fire are healed, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of medicines causing blindness.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days the blind cure does not come, it is good; and if not, then begin again the cauterization on that which is delayed corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this medicine is never once cured of the disease by means of fire cauterization; but nevertheless, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said that the cure of the medicine causing blindness is done by division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come to the tip
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	And sometimes happens that at their tips by defuses arises a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big hairy thing which bleeds the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is as follows from two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to be known that there are two kinds of cauterization: fire cauterization and water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cauterization is this: take a hot iron, like a pen of a vulture, and make it so that it can stick to the nail from all sides, and have thin edges; then put it on hot the nail, and wrap your hand around the nail completely until it comes off at the root; and he makes a plaster of wild mallows crushed with water, and leaves the plaster on for all night, and the nail will come out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with caraway as soon as possible until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by defuses the heart, and many times come to their hands and feet, so it is necessary that you bring the fire cautery of hot water; and it is in this way: take a twig of oak or iron, or a feather of swan, and put it on the nail and the arthrotic joint, that is to say porpuls verrues; and put the twig on so that it purple all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the twig comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water path deep until the root; and allow the patient a little of the biting of hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will be pulled out all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make another, until you have drained all those who are within, then treat those who cause harm with garlic.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes from cold or fever or another thing, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the feet, and one above the stomach with olive oil cauterization; this will stop the shaking, and quickly heal the person from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	There is one time when visible pustules appear on the body, which come from corruption of large masses of matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is the first time that they appear, then a cauterization should be made on each head of the pustule: a thin cauterization with a branch of miraballe, which is grasped at the fire, or with a root of amara-root that has been slowly ground;
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And in no way are the fire cauterizations applied at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow hair forward from it, but the superfluity which comes from it is broken, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Sometimes there is great pain from the artery that is cut off at the wound which comes to the surface, or when incising an abscess, or when cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a horrible thing to stink up.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And in any case, when there is one, then you hurry to place your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it as much as the blood stops from your index, and no more drops; then you take fire with olive oil, small and large, as many as it is red; then take I, or a large or small according to the wound and its position, and hold the cauterizer on that vein where you are holding your finger, and keep the cauterizer on until the blood stops flowing.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if he burns too much when you feel your pain on the vein, and the cauterization is over, if you take another of the cauterizations that are in the fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other as long as the pain is gone; and be careful that you don't burn the nerve that hurts, and that no other evil comes upon the sick person; and know that when the artery is cut short of [the body part], it cannot be well healed even if it were by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or by cauterization, or by extraction before it is treated, or by a strong thread, or by medicines put on it which have the power to heal blood; and let it be bound and stretched well.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the healing of a tightly bound bandage or burning things placed on it, or similar things, if it does not benefit, do not use it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and he doesn't have mirable medicine ready, then he must put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well until it is satisfied above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the skin, but wet it with cold water often so that it is cold all over and thickens and satisfies; and make incisions in front of those to whom cauterization and medicine are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of remedies for wounds
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the methods and causes and instruments and shapes of the cauterizations; and I put this ointment on the back of the head up to the hairline, and I will go into this chapter by that middle way for those who have a headache.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, as I begin to tell you, it is necessary, o man, that you know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of cautery, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not venture into folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in the ways of men come to cure.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If it comes from those who have so affected themselves with their disease that they die easily because of the foolishness they practice with their disease, and of the great nature of their illness; then we must fear them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these who give you their meaning, and say: "Wait, I am hungry"; and the disease is pitiable.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you grant consent to those who come to you having this mannerism, but show more great courtesy in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open widely but carefully from him of whom you are certain, and of whom you could have taken and lost; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health may be converted; and he who will help you to good reputation, and glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you will ask for the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered you this chapter in explaining by chapters, according to that which is before or the chapter of the cauterizes, which I have devised from the top down, so that you may find more easily that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	Dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	It is known that this disease often occurs in infants and when the baby cries too much, the head of the child is twisted; and it is never answered by this cause that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and all those that I have seen it come upon quickly die; and by what seems to me it is better to relax the treatment in such cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulders were plain with moisture and the head got heavier every day until it could not be supported; and he believed so much in the moisture that he died, and this moisture is so gathered around the joints on the back, between the curve of the spine and the bones; and the treatment is so hard for him that he gets a big wound at the top of the head; and so far as we know:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper and the abscess larger, then make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has broken the bone, and the signs you see are the pits of the head overshooting each side, and the water shoots out strongly when you press it with your hand, and it does not close again: then you should make three incisions in this way around the head:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After you have stripped the bandages and powders, put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then unbind it, and cure the wound with poultices and ointments, and let the head dry out evenly, and give the patient dry meat to eat until the limb is healed and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you look at the opening of the anus, and the assembly of the sharp edge; for it is never in front; it is never behind; it is never on the right; nor is it ever on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut where the anus opens, and the sharpening of the blade, and do according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not block the artery; and come fluttering with blood, so that the patient dies from a burst artery and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "cataract" in the eye or the ear, and the illness is old, and the remedy of medicine does not benefit, then the following remedy is to use cauterization with what one will cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	He therefore, since you have covered the eyes, must make the patient stand with his head back; then rub his neck with a sharp towel until the arteries appear, and then strip him of his collar to all the towel; then see where the vein bites, and its lines are after the ears, and they are not closed; then sign the lines of the cheek, then cover both with a spikelet sharp on two sides, until the saw comes out against the bone, and this either through the large of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see it, cut the spikelet off the artery and cover it above, sawing also as two sides a two.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is covered, let it keep jumping upwards continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open on feeling, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three hands, then sign the cheeks and saw to the bone; and what it comes to put forward so is six inches, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the re-expansion of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone no hole, if the apostemes cut not there, then extract the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of gristly meat
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the gristly meat of an old person comes, and the catarrh is acquired, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old sore forsened and similar things, and it is medicated by the methods of medical treatments and all that does not benefit him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes his hair grow again in his temples, and hears the artery opening in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not too tight but in some men who are too cold; and if it is tightened, then the patient pulls his collar from some sheets, then he rubs the place with any sharp cloth, and raises the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatumile where this form is.
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	And then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, and then turn it upside down as pincers, and remove all the thin layers that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it into the tip of the hook, and cut off that part according to the quantity of II shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut off, then there will be no saving for anyone in all things.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And trim the blood of VI c/ down to III; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with II strong double threads of silk, so that it does not come out in front of the wound's bleeding, and comes off from the blood; then cut off what is between the II threads at that same time, and then, if you see, then cauterize the wound with the fire cautery down to the bone as long as the shoulders are cut; and this is the operation of the muedre, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cautery is an aid to end the moisture: for this is a more powerful aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For in the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with fine cotton and place a well-made cloth on top; and when you remove them, let medicines made from dry things that produce blood, and tents, until they are well; and if without cutting the artery as much as you can, if you hurry, cover it with cautery, or employ the place of vitriol and extract it with your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this [vitriol], put it on the place of cold water until the blood stops, and remove it as it should be; and that which is stiffened and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein on either side with a sharp cautery, but let the cutting be well spaced to keep the heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, then it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have sown in two places, and you place on fire so that it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and are kept apart between the two shoulders because this cauldron is not sold from all over; and this is the shape of the cauldron:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes come down from the veins that are on the forehead of the head of fire, and there is no benefit from the medicine that one does, and you see the face of the sick person turn gray, and feel cold; and if the oil is soft and moist so that the hair of the papers falls off, and the papers are burnt, and scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to do this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	Et let them call the ancient "cure for contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his or her hair or forehead; then make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead; and one of these cuts should be like II pairs all together, cutting through the forehead from above downward until it reaches the nose, and the others II pairs by the sides of the bones, and take care not to cut the arteries which are on the sides of the bones; and keep your hand away from the joint of the two jaws, and let each wound have the quantity of III pairs joined together; and have ready a piece of sponge and lots of rags for wiping away the blood, then pour the sputum from II parts since this is the shape:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And from the incision that is to be made on the temple until the second incision; and peel off all the curse that is between the two cuts up to the bone, and then do the same thing from the middle cut until the other second one, and then remove this sputum forcefully:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if one bottles in the first cut the instrument that is called "culter", and it is very well tranced on one side, and on the other side is suf, not tranced, and this is the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the cutter-biting towards the cart at the back, and the cutting bit towards the bone, and bottle it so that it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head at the base until the incision is continuous up to the back, and then the other way around in the middle cut up to the other side; and then remove the hair evenly, and press it out with fire; then put in each cut a tent of fine cotton, and put drape-bags soaked in wine and oil and vinegar on them, and make sure that the abscesses do not come out; and on the third day wash it off, and bring a great amount of water, and wash it off again, and cure it with basilicon ointment with rose-oil, and other cures for wounds, until it is well.
dou reume des eulz	Dou reume des Eulz.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	For when the catarrh has become accustomed to coming on, and you see hair that is thin and small, and it weakens vision and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and at which chief pain ague comes and the patient sneezes; therefore know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from many veins, and the cure that he is, so is it.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And is that you command to the patient to rub his forehead, then make a great cut across the forehead, and another one of broad width at the top.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the cut of the left temple to the right temple, and cut only up to the bone; and remove your hand from the roots of the temples that move when he drinks; and when the bone is exposed, then wet all the blood with a sponge, and then cover it between the II lips of the cut and put cotton there, and bind with linen bandages; then place dry bandages soaked in wine and oil over it, and keep away from abscesses; when it has been exposed, then let him rub the bone until the hair begins to grow, then cure it with drying things, which cause a sore.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this way: take two parts of flour from wheat, and three parts of colophony, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to stop the flow of blood everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ringing in the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that chafes the ears is one of the four: or grain, or beast, or stone of mine or similar thing as iron; or seed, as nuts, beans, peas; or flowing thing as water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it chafes in the ear a stone or any other thing that does not fit into the ear, and does not go into the ear, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, pour in a little purple oil or oil of sesame, then apply extraction; and when it is done, let it stare and stop up the nostrils, and put a piece of cloth or wool in front of the ear, and raise the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Mouth of times comes well with this cure; and if it does not come well, extract them with gentle pins, for this is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes well with the pins, it is good; if not, extract them gently with small sharp tools; and if they do not come out with those, make a hole in the ear with an iron nail or a knife at the top or bottom, and stop up that which is inside with soft wax so that the liquid cannot enter with the tool; then try to form it again, because many times it comes well as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, take some glue and put it on the hairs, and put a cotton ball on top of it; then press the glue onto the stone or something, and try again.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et s’elle ne sort fier de toutes ces choses que nous avons dit, si te hâte de fendre l’oreille ainsi que l’apothème chaud et les spasmes; et la manière de la fendure est que tu fais tout d'abord soigner le mal à la tête, et que tu extrayes le sang selon la mesure de sa vertu, puis fais reposer le mal entre tes mains et tourne l’oreille au-dessus, et fends une petite fendure dans la racine de l’oreille vers la graisse où elle dépendante; et soit la fendure aussi large qu'une lune, tant que tu viens à la pierre, puis l’os selon ton pouvoir, et le sucer hastement à ta bouche; et la cure autant qu’il soit guéri.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is a boil that has broken out and swollen, administer extraction; and if it cannot be drained, administer a thin sputum according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on this grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But don't do it when you think the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have done it many times; then extract it with fine tweezers and at the base, as we have said, so that the extractions are orderly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, when you hear a loud noise in the ear, the patient should use an aperitif first, and widely open the ear with a cotton wick.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be careful on that ear where the noise is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it jumps forward, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it jumps forward, it's good. If not, take several pieces of his thumb towards and slightly, and heat them on the fire; and put one piece in his ear, and cut off another piece from the other part, and burn another piece on the ear; and do not stop doing this piece by piece until all the noise goes away, and so it jumps all the way; and if you see anything, take a little piece and bottle it up in fire until the more painful piece is burnt; then make another one from the others pieces until all the noise goes away, as we have said in the ear.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it is a small ear, as in a wasp or similar creature, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large ear, prepare for the extraction of pincers; and this is the lighter thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if there are no worms, prepare for subtle pincers; and if there are none, take the hairpin to see what shape it is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And pour a small amount of pain in the patient, then suck from the whole hairpin; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey, if they stop up the cotton tube as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones tried in the lancing of worms, and you will find them or treatment of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear on all this instrument, from which this is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if there is silver or gold, desalinate the small holes and over them for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument of silver well made because it, and if you see take a razor and wrap cotton around the tip forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the tube, and the tube be in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand with tempo until the oil is distilled or trickling from the ear; and let the patient smell it within, and let the distillations I pot scorch on the fire so as to be distilled in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ears' stretching
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have no hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men by stretching of a wound, or by a chariot running into the ear, and such stretching always comes once completely into the ear, if one cannot see it; and never happens I poc [is] lost the hole, and he sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes completely once, if one cannot see it, is of great benefit in many dispositions, and in that we see it, you must put the ear of the sick to the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this spittle of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be up and down all plain, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the operation is by a chariot running or a cor (a kind of tool) in the ear, if it holds the pinches gently, and copes lightly, until that carriage is all oiled.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the eye is completely blinded, then take a fine light razor and heat it slightly, and put the edge to the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the patient feels a sharp pain in the ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to hurt the ears; then put a plug according to its width, and moisten it with Egyptian oil.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not cover it every day until the wound is healed, or take a plug and wet it with rose oil, and powder it with vitriolic broth; and if you see the ear drain, cover it so that you take out the plug and moisten another plug made of rose oil and wax, until the discharge is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain is caused by heat, then dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that relieve heat-related pain, which are made from distilled liquors.
de la char des papieres	of the cart of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Take a thin piece of paper and place it on the nail when wet and dry, then apply the tip of an iron file to its roots; then put vinegar on top.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if not peeled off, then the fire cautery with a small and fine cauterizer, and the cauterizer after the incision is made clean; and often peel them off, because nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn up and do not return.
de la gresle	of the grease
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Sometimes paper comes in things that seem grease-like in form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grease", and it is a mixture of moisture that is large in the paper on top; the work is such: take care so that the grease does not move from one side to the other, and this is a light thing to know; then peel each part lightly, then pick it up with tweezers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing a bit into the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the split is large, join it with stitches, and care for it until it is well; and if it is small, do not use force, because the ointment will soon restore it and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the split is descending from the ear towards the top part, turn the paper over, and place the split between two pins, and cover and press it from both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not harm the patient; and when the split is covered, pour oil of salt water on it, and care for the hole where the pain comes from until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the hair
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is removed by webs of paper on top, and this happens more often in children who have no people, and harms their eyes very much, and their tears hasten to their eyes; and because they lie on their faces at night, and sleep on them, and the paper on their faces becomes moist, which swells and changes its appearance, having covered it with exinah which is opened in oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the joint to your two and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way to do this is that the patient should place his head on your shoulder; and then take a linen cloth, and spread out a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exit between each part, and then put it on him; and press with your two hands from one side and the other, so that the exit is gathered into the circle; and make a slit in the middle of the moisture with a sharp blade, making it not any larger than the wound at the opening of the vein; and make the skin roundly as you come to the exit; and in several positions the exit comes out of the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Take away then all a piece of cloth between your two hands at the sides, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as much as it is scattered; and keep that you do not twitch in the slit, so that you come to all the fat until you reach the oil, so that you do not burn it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if he does not open too much in the beginning of the incision, if he opens it lightly a little so that it appears; then extract it as we said, then wet the bandage with water and put it on, and pull out from the bend.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind salt and put it on to corrupt that moisture which is delayed.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal him as long as he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the aposteme area that is hot, if the healer dilutes it with cool water as long as he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of hair on paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When in paper there grow hairs unlike nature, and become shriveled, if they cause trouble to the eyes, and bring about various diseases as do tears and softens of papers and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the hairs; then the healer should act according to four ways: either by fire cautery all together, or by medicine with water according to that which he has before him, or by paste of cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cutting, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if at the time of copulation there is a great quantity of paper according to that which the paper is softened; then put to all the paste on the II lines that you have signed, and begin with great tears until small; and let it be one of the cleavages near the natural hair in the thickness of a root, then pour the vinegar into one of the II angles from which it comes, then scorch it all; then assemble the II lips to a seam of a needle at all I wool thread, and wash the blood, and make air the superfluity of the threads over the II sorcilz to all nothing sticky, if you see to do this; and if not, so do not worry about it, then leave the seam and the threads until III days or IIII; then cure the wound without a seam of things drying and constricting, for the paper relaxes at the heat of the wound and its assembly, but the seam is mature (if they say the ancients), and this work without fear; and if in another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure which is as much as the mirty fuel, as we have told, to III oncines desevrez according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	and then take one who rises to small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you cannot hold the forceps, and [the hair] is not even, then take a needle with thread, and wrap it around the shape; and wrap another thread that is very long, and this second thread, cut it short, and join it evenly between your two hands; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have tied it, as we have told you, then join the two lips of the wound with a stitch, and heal it until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, so ease it with cerotomy and similar suturing; and never happens that the hair of the paper are twisted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the stitch in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l'oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes a long time, and the bandage becomes firm, then continue the treatment until he is well; and when the wound has healed, and if the paper is lifted up, and they will no longer grow hair; and this is the form of the two nails that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute un fil de soie souef et subtil; alors assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilement, et soit la longesce des fils une palme de long; puis ordenez en la chasse le autre fil subtil de soie brièment, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief dans ton sain; et sois délicat avec le soleil si que li ovraiges soit déclairiez, car c'est un ovraige subtil et menuis, alors boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine du poil ajostité, et la fais percer en la papiere hospitalement tant que tu la trais desus le poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse ce poil, s'il en a un ou deux ou trois ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que les poils viennent fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec le poil natureil.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et s'il est chassé, il est traité et les poils ne viennent pas avec lui; si vous traînez la chasse au désos, à tout le fil que vous avez ordonné, aussi longtemps que la chasse vient de l'endroit supérieur et que vous la voyez par la vision de l'huile; alors, si vous traînez la chasse et le fil, et versez l'huile et laissez-la pendant II jours ou III, aussi longtemps que les poils s'enracinent en leur place et naissent le cheveu; et si les poils sont petits, il accompagne un petit cheveu nature, et soit élevé avec celui où vous le laissez, aussi longtemps qu'il est allongé et puis le libère.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the oil corruption
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called "aleacrati" or "porriture", comes in oil, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens by accident of wound, or of cut, or of cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of this treatment is that you split that stitch, and sever the lips from him, and put linen cloth inside, and leave it until it is healed; and it is not appropriate that you use in his treatment things that dry and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, then the disease returns worse than before; but use of softening things, such as fenugreek; and water or ale and flax seed are cooked, and olive oil is melted into it, and wrapped in a cloth, and treat him from that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you take care that it does not stitch again in the same way as before; and the remedies which we have said are not effective unless we deal with this disease, so that it does not return according to the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	from the horse which comes to water
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things; and the path of the ajutoire in the shoulder is that you press an awl, so that it has double thread, and insert it into the shoulder blade, and make it pierce from the left larmier as far as the right, so that the thread comes to II shoulders of the blade; then are the blade on top of all the awl, and the cope on the wide spatumile.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the blade returns according to what it should, it is good; if not, then take a razor and put it in the cut, and turn the blade, and make II cuts where it costs within the blade; and let II angles of the incision that you have coped be assembled so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter that has no "I griesche"; then remove this blade, according to the quantity that its edges are sharp for dislocation, from what goes into the blade, then join the II separated parts, and sew them with a thread of lamb; then let the cure be of those that we have said about soft medicines, and of tents, until he is well.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si la maladie vient de fendure, ou de costure, ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fente large du papier, et selon celui qui est ci-devant; puis desserre entre les deux lames d'une tèneuse, comme je l'ai dit. Il faut faire l'ouvrage selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les maîtres saiges apparilleront à peine de tout leur pouvoir comment il faut ramener la figure à sa forme naturelle; et le malade aussi, selon celui qu'il convient d'ouvrir et d'extruder avec plusieurs dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Et si soudain la maladie vient de fendure, ou de couture, ou de cautère, il faut que tu fendes une fente large du papier, et selon celui qui est ci-devant; puis desserre entre les deux lames d'une teneuse, comme je l'ai dit. Il faut faire l'ouvre
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si soudain la maladie vient de fendure, ou de couture, ou de cautère, il faut que tu fendes une fente large du papier, sur le blanc de l'huile, et ne puits ni bouger ni faire tes ouvrages naturels; il convient donc que tu y introduises la pointe d'un rasoir, desserrée, à le haut; et l'extrayez aux pinces, jusqu'à ce que vous atteigniez celui qui est au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit ni trop aiguisé ni trop tranchant, afin que le malade ne souffre pas d'une lame trop aiguisée qui pourrait brûler l'huile ; et soit ton incision, dont tu arraches la partie assemblee, legierement, afin que le papier revienne selon sa forme naturelle; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et ne font aucune fois dans de l'huile aigue salee, mais versent de l'eau douce, et du vin, puis mettent entre le papier et l'huile une tente de lin, et mettent sur l'huile de la laine mouillée en abundance d'oeuf; et après trois jours, utilisez le colier et les substances soudanes jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Saiches that the nail has two appearances: it is either nervous and resembling hard sinew, or not nervous but resembling white congealed moisture, which cannot be touched with iron or patted without causing pain; both appearances begin to spread around the whole eye and the whole light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the incision method is that the patient puts his hand on the skin, then he cuts the nails; and take the paper into your hand, then coil the nail with small double-edges, and pull it up; then take a needle, and put thereon a hair of horse, or cow, or ox, and thread it tightly; and double the needle's point a little and pierce the nail all the way through, and tie the thread to the nail, and cut off the remaining part at the root of the nail so that the skin tears gently and naturally, leaving behind only a thin layer of skin; so that the incision does not cause the usual flow of blood; and never pull out the nails all at once, and as we have said; then cut off the remaining skin around the nail very carefully:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And guard that the spatule does not touch the raw cloth and tear it, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after incision pour a little sail-cloth broied into the oil, and a collar made of litargy, and let it alone until the next day; then cure those who need it as long as they are healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, this image of a nail with medicines is often cured; and they were born as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, then work oil on the sick person, and take a little spatula made according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail smoothly, and if you see that it is thinning out a little at a time and the rasp speeds up, then distill from your mouth into the oil a collar made of litargy and of red oil and sail-cloth broied, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin again the other work according to this same method, as long as it is all bone.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is against you in the oil, as an abscess is hot, then the milk, and first treat the hot abscess until it is well, then continue the work as before until it is well.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm is against you in the oil by great damage, if it is suspended at the end, and cut off a part and not all, that tears do not come; then distil in the oil red drops that are made of litargirite.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of meat that grows on the apple
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of meat that grows on the apple tree
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case it is necessary that you adjust the cure for each weak part of nature; and from accidents, in the work of iron; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that those members are suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	For these are red veins that are covered over with oil, and endure their work and weaken the oil every time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore the first who sees that the oil is weak, and the veins are cut, and there is no other disease but the veins; then set the oil in this way: instruct the patient to put his head in your lap, then suspend those veins completely according to his wisdom, and make the incisions narrow according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two incisions at a time according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and then turn those veins with subtle force, and drain the blood hour by hour until you remove them from the oil; and be careful not to bruise the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and make this work before noon, so that you do not scorch more than the veins; and when you have done this, let it distill in the oil green and red collyria to corrupt what is delayed in the sebaceous.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you cannot turn all of it in that hour, then make a paste on the oil of soothing things to ease the pain of the hairs, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and assured of the abscess being warm, then begin again according to this method which is mentioned above until it is healed; and this is the form of turning them with force.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	I will answer in English, as I am not familiar with the language of the original text: 
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the jaw is uncovered, and you will see corruption and blackness, if the reis has all the instrument from which this form comes; and it is called "aspre chief", and let it be made of fire from the head reont, and let it be pointed as a lime as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the top of the place where the bone is corrupted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do it once, then return the place of medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the jaw is souded, and the neck of the bow is souded, and remains so for forty days, and there is no increase or improvement in it, then you know that it is cured; unless there is another device than to bring the fistula to the opening of the nose according to this form: and this is that when you uncover the bone for the second time with fire according to this form, and let the iron be three-angled, and the point be made thin up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone of the jaw, and remove your hand from the oil, then return to all the saw until it penetrates the bone and feels by the pain that it causes him because he holds his hand on his nose; and when he returns to its place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the char is renewed and hardens the bones, if it goes into the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open completely, and there is no difficulty in turning them, if it comes to the nose, you need to relax; then the patient is cured, then place the oil in a cloth made of linen, wool, and silk, and then place it on the patient's face, and then tie it tightly; then place the hot stones over the oil, and then strain the oil, and place it under bindings and drapes; and the way to do this is that you take enough drapes, and double each one four times, and then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity needed by the eyes; then strain the oil from above a hard bandage, and start again with the hot stones without causing pain; then remove the bandage and leave the strained oil there day and night, and if it comes loose, you need to re-strain it a lot; then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the oil improve, it is good; if not, then start again with the plaster and drapes and the bandage and hot stones until it is cured.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	a dislocation of the shoulder
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a rupture comes in the veiled cloth, then open it up, and come out strongly as if it were a piece of linen, and is likely to be seen; then if you cover it up, the repairs are such that you put a needle into the root of the part below until it reaches the top, then put another needle where there is double thread from the part of the arm; and pierce it, and leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then cover the double thread with one part of the cloth, and fasten it well, and remove the needle and put oil of another wet one in abundance of balm; and let it be as long as the thread chirps with the cloth, then treat the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound by wrapping each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs are very long, then pierce them with a fine spike that comes out perfectly from the oil, and draw off the moisture of the albaquinoid and dry the hairs, and cut them short. And then remove them until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bowl of oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called “alcunnati”, seems to be only oil, resembling water descending, and yet it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the ovary is such that you place the patient on a seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and rub it until the bowl comes up to your hairs; then remove it firmly, and do not draw off and break the light, and see how the patient appears so as he used to be; and if it does not descend, know that it is water, and the descent of the bowl is not done as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are sitting the sick person between your hands, then take the slender spatumile and stretch it over the corneal membrane with the help of the continuous conjunctive with the corneal membrane and the crown, until the bow is in place; and when it has come out, let it be distilled into warm acerbic honey, or acerbic water or fenugreek boiled and honey, then let it be cured by another cure until it is well.
des aigues de l’oil	with the help of the continuous conjunctive with the corneal membrane and the crown,
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of needles in the division, and what is necessary to pierce; if it is done according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you sit the sick person between your hands away from the light because of the sun, and hold the oil with great strength; then put the paper of the oil in your left hand if the hand is on the left, or in your right hand if the hand is on the right; then take the instrument which is called "almagda" in your right hand if the hand is on the left, or in your left hand if the hand is on the right; then put the point of the instrument at the root of the crown by the thickness of a hair in that clear oil to the part of the smaller tear, and pour the instrument which is called "almagda" finely, and turn back your hand so that it pierces into the clear oil, and you will see that almagda comes to the void; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be at the end of the measure of the space which is from the plumule until the end of the blackness; and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, and put the instrument up to the place where the water is, then express a path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is lying down now, then the patient will see himself before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and then he gets up again, holds the instrument with force, and when it is firmly fixed and does not move, slowly remove thealmağdalofthehandandtheheadturningtomaintoandfrom.Thenputa little ofthegemmoilintoit,andletitoutofthedressing.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put on the outside either the oil or another wet thing in oil and a lot of balm, and bind with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	And those who are of our blood, let us put on the common bread with a lot of balm.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if thealmağdalacan't enter the oil because of its hardness, since there are some men whose hairs are too hard, then you must squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	Et perceive then the conjunctive separately, and don't go too far with the fire; but do make it subtle, then pour on the mercury, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient the sleeping position, where he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and be careful of all movements, and press light meats, and don't move his head nor to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his disposition until three days; then release him into that same dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put him back in the bond until the seventh day; and it is not appropriate that you do this in the time of the cure or after the incision at this time, but it is appropriate that you do it, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If the abscess is ready, then you should pour oil in front of the seventh day, and prepare it with what soothes an abscess; and when it has calmed down, then take off the bandage and put on a wide rim so that it can cover any day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and turn to their cases; and know that no doctors should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the Land of Israel, who told us that in their country there is a medicine called almagora which sucks up the water, but I have never seen any such thing in our land, nor have I ever read about it in any of the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the shapes of the powder of almagora, so that he who does not know them may see them; and let them be of pure gold:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let there be three angles of this middle subtlety behind.
de la char sor le neis	the heart near the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	There are different kinds of births or births that seem like scorpions at the mouth; and if there are such ones or not, there is a horse with a black or white color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of those horses that are souef and not enchancree, it is appropriate that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; and operate on his nasopharyngeal passages, and try them out; for if you do not recognize this, you will be able to support it in the middle subtlety taken from one part, as long as you know that that horse is all bone.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if nothing remains that cannot be covered, if you open it with subtlety lightly, so that there is nothing left; and if it rises up or an abscess forms, if the scar is right or as it should be; and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize them until the wound is closed and all the horses are boned, then cut or birth it easily and quickly or let it go.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If there is a seizure, and moisture comes to the palace of the head, know that he is healthy; and if the moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is no room in the bone above, by which the instrument cannot cut: then you must put a piece of linen thread a little thick, and tie it with our hands, and place between each knot a space of one or two inches; and put the child's feet on the thread at his power, and pull them by smelling them until they come through his nose into the mouth; and many times do this to the children in school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and know which comes first by smelling them as we do.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make sure you know that the new wine has corrupted the skin, then treat the patient with vinegar, wash the blood, and soak the wound in Egyptian oil, and put it back on the wound as before; make sure for III days or more, as long as the vinegar corrupts all those who are delayed from healing; and then put a plug of plaster into the ear for some days while he is healthy, and if there is a need for dry medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purifying the head, by which oil and medicine are distilled in the ear.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	Be of silver or gold, resembling a lit lamp, like an earring, and so carry it; and if you see, make a closed plug, and also the instrument is flat for purifying the head; and I always have in my hand for holding it when I heat oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the horse over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Several times, at the back of the neck, a disease arises that is called "thigh", and grows and becomes very large, so much so that it can be seen in front; therefore, you should cut it at the beginning, and the bone completely; then put on top fire or medicine burning; and if one delays to cover it until it is very large, take care not to touch it with iron because it is an inflamed pustule, for when one covers it once, great evil comes to the sick person; and if the pustule is touched gently, not with iron color, and you see that it can be completely covered, if the sick man doesn't touch it, and treat his neck with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck has been cut and dressed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Saiches that when soluions of continuance comes in one of these cartilages ovraiges, i profited poc, fur that in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Saiches that when soluions of continuance comes in one of these ovraiges cartilages, i profited poc, fur that in some men. It is therefore necessary to can ceu avient to anyone, if regarde the plaie is fresche to all his sanc; and adonques ajoste the II levres to a costure, then the cure as long as he is sanez; and if the levres are ja desevrees of one side and other, si covient that you escorches all the parties of lor keur as long as they sainent, then assemble the II levres to a costure, and l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; and put sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, and le laisse as long as he chiece par lui, then the cure d’oignement as long as he is sanez.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to sew up a wound so that you gather the solution together: or with needles, as we have said in sewing up the belly; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the lips, at home come inside the lips an abscess hard, resembling grains of sand, and small and large; then cover them with needles and tie them tightly in each part; then dip it in vitriol broth, until the wound is dry; and then let it air dry, and cure the place of dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the cheeks
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a tooth comes loose from the gum, which the old call "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold it with pliers, and cut it at its root, and let the blood flow or the air; then put on top of the root vitriol broth, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this tooth comes out again after the incision, and many times it happens, if you cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not come back again after cauterization; and these are the forms of the instruments to plug.
des sordens	of sorrows
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	of sorrows
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary that when you treat the pain of the teeth you delay drawing them as much as you can, because there should be no excuse for not drawing them.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So then, when the patient is forced to draw the tooth, you must be certain about the tooth that needs to be drawn.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Maitres times the pain of the patient left, and thought that it was in the tooth of Saint John, and made him pull the good tooth; and yet the pain does not go away because the evil is extracted, for we have already tried to do this to these elderly people; and when you are certain of the aching tooth, so that you scorch around the tooth at all i. a strong spatumil to protect the gums from all sides; then move it with your fingers or small pliers on the first and second hole and hole, until they are well loosened, then tighten the pliers firmly; and be the head of the patient in your good between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not hurt, then take any of these instruments and put it inside each part slightly, and move it so as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is deeply lodged and broken, fill the space with gauze where it is stuck; and if it is carefully held in place with tweezers so that it does not break when you remove it; and it is necessary to thoroughly clean the gums around the tooth so that the tooth can be removed.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And do you well to take care not to break it and remain a part of it, and return to the patient by the evil of the root greater pains than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care not to do so as does the ignorant doctor who, by his haste and boldness, often breaks any chariot and does not administer anything except what we have told you; but he brings about any great disease by the poison of that root or by the chariot which he breaks, so that sometimes the tooth is drawn by wine or ewe's milk and whey; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, so that the teeth do not move at all when you pull the string, and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick limbs so that they do not bend at all when you pull it, and be made of good iron, and be toothed so that it can hold fast.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root is still when you pull it, then you must put cotton moistened with oil on the joint or with butter every day.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the joints are soft, for then the pliers that are called 'algefri' will not hold, and the head seems like a nag; and be inside made as a file and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, then you must peel off the kerchief completely around the root, and put the instrument that is called 'altheri', that is to say, an awl, this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be large and strong so that it does not break, and the root jumps out by this, is good; if not, if you help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come here after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument that has two rays, from which comes the shape here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are before in the rasion of dens, and this instrument that seems a pair of great pliers, from which is the form here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and this instrument is out that it cannot break, and know that many tools of dens are; and also other tools, which are not mentioned; and the master subtil trueveth himself by his own instrument, according to what his work and the disease show him, for there are different diseases in which the old man does not teach an instrument for the diversity of them; and if he does not break the cart or other bones where it lies, if he seeks the instruments that suit him, I have told you, and helps himself with gestures, from which is the form here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And are big and well-fitting to hold the bone, so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return him to his place with medicines suitable for this one, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, then he puts all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not seem to fit naturally in the mouth, and their form is ugly, and most especially in young women, it is necessary that you know whether the root is also in front of the tooth, and is not in its correct place, and cannot be sewn or filed: then cut it off; and if it is attached to the tooth, take this instrument whose shape we have described, which resembles a small pick, and is made of iron;
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap fits and fits hard by the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a file of this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime that one makes needles; and in the same way the tooth bites and bites gently with the hands every day so that it does not move until it chatters; then the plane at the end to any rasier, and its edge is too sharp and bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth loosens
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth are loosening, either by percussion or by chewing, and the patient cannot press on what he chews until he spits it out, and you have cured them with restrictive medicines, and that doesn't work; then you should restrain them with a gold thread, because silver wire becomes green and rotten, but gold wire never moves; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you notice any decay, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then place the bridges between the decayed teeth, whether there is one or more, until you have cleaned them thoroughly on the other side; then restart the covering up to the part where you started, and tighten your hand slightly and thoroughly so that it doesn't move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it can't escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then tie the hair to a pair of pliers, and join them together, and pull between the healthy teeth, and place it so that it does not hurt the tongue; and then leave it so tight as it can endure, and if it falls off or the hairs run, hold it with another pair of pliers; if it lasts and serves for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the trimming of the healthy two teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then when the tooth loosens, if one puts it back in its place over and over again, as we have said; and no one who is not wise and patient should meddle with it, and never make the shape of a tooth of ivory, and put it back in its place where it has fallen out, and hold it as we have said, and it lasts and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the ring of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No one time is the ring which comes from the tongue or nature, that it must be thus: If by accident of a sore seam; And the ovraiges are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and hold his head in your hand, and let the tongue; then take the large nerve of the tongue, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or no, and it is a sudden wound from a sore, so you will squeeze the hook and take the large nerve; and guard that the cut does not become too perfect, for the artery which is behind. And when you have done this, lift the water of rose and thus, or cold water, then put behind the tongue a piece of linen; and dip it each night, so that the leech cannot be joined.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the blood rushes out, put vinegar on top of it; and if it does not stop, cauterize it with the slow fire, which is good for that; then treat it with other treatments until it is well.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a red or black color or a hard skin, then the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, because it is cancer; and if it inclines towards blenchory, and there is moisture, then pour the vinegar, and make it with a thin spatula, and deliver it from one side to another; and if it comes out of your vein, put vinegar on top until it is dried up, and then return to your vein as long as you draw everything out; then lift up its skin like this and that, and treat it with other treatments until it is well.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No time comes from within the throat called "godath", and they are properly called "amandres", and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, be careful: if it is an abscess of small size and light color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron either for fear of blood loss; but let it rest until it is dead, and then you will remove it, or else it would break by itself; and if it is a white color, and the root is thin, then prepare the instrument to cover it, but first see if the abscess is hot and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and let his teeth be in order, and he opens his mouth and puts his fingers between his teeth, and presses the tongue onto all the instrument, so that this is its form; and it should also be of silver or gold as fine as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And then press the tongue against all this instrument, and you will see the abscess, if take the scythe and put it in the almond, and bring up higher than you can; and bring any thing of the webs with it, then the cap on the instrument, from which comes the form, that seems a lot of forces; and yet the heads are corbe, and one place to another, and they are very sharp, and are made of iron where or of an engine:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then the cap is with pliers, from which comes the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be it trenchant on one side and not on the other; and when you have cap one of the almonds, then cap the other according to this same manner, and after the incision gargarize the patient with hot water, and with ease and quickly, and if blood comes out, gargarize the patient with cold water, or cooked pomegranate juice, or oak leaves, and similar things, until the wound is well; then cure him as long as he is well; and never let other abscesses come in the throat than the two almonds, if cap them all in this same way carefully.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicined a woman with an abscess that was lying within her throat, which is to say a small-sized abscess; and I had it very well closed up all the way around her throat so that she could not breathe through the passageway that was stopped up, and she could not eat or drink, and if she had delayed for another day or two she would have died.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so raised that it had been there for two days through the two passages where the abscess drained.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I quickly then put the needle into one of the two passages where the abscess drained, and pulled it through hard, and in a large quantity of blood; then refitted another one into the other passage where the abscess drained, and pressed her mouth shut and pressed her tongue; then I filled another one into the abscesses, and only let out a little bit of blood; and so the passageway in her throat was opened up again, and she began to drink water and wine again, and kept on cutting away at that abscess for a long time; and the abscesses closed back up again, and filled the space that I had left empty, until they got very big; then I sewed them up and cauterized them inside her throat: so it remained stopped up; and I departed from those parts, and only God knows what happened to her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the pain comes from the eye, and it is severe and distant, then it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is a large, rounded pain, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the upper tooth is pained, and it is thin, then you should chop it; and if it is round and assembled and not distant; and it is bloody or yellow-colored or black, then you should avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger in the eye disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blushing and distant, let the patient sit in front of the sun, and press his tongue on the instrument which we have mentioned above; then cut the onion in the eye, and peel it off, and chop it with two instruments which I have said in cutting the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cover more than the excess that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it hurts the voice and speech; and after incision, use what we said in the incision of the two breasts, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has a fear of covering; then you must use fire cauterization for the sensitive part.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of fire cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in your hand, and then press the tongue to the instrument that we have said or fire cautery paste, and confound it with sharp water so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in employing the shape of this instrument, from which comes this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the head have a hairline or a thread to put the medicine on, as if it were a spoon, and put the instrument that we have said or fire cautery medicine on all the medicine on the edge; and let the patient lie on his side, so that saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and cause blisters; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the edge, the quantity of half an hour, as long as you see it getting darker and the medicine's effects are coming out; and if you notice, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and put the instrument on all the cotton in the bag, as long as the cotton is wet; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and wipe after three or four days or five. And if you need to refresh the fire cautery of the medicine, if it needs refreshing, and after the cautery rinse with cold water, and cure by gargling as long as it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, except for the cautery. If she is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calamus and ysop and oreganum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all in a pot or some of them, and pour water thereon easily, and make it boil; and the pot must be very tightly covered with strong clay, and place the instrument over it according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And be of silver or gold, and let one of the shoulder-joints come out into the mouth of the sick person as long as the vapor rises up through the cane until the uvula is dead; then begin often, as long as the uvula dries up, and keep that you do not make this at the beginning of the coming of the abscess, for many things happen; and do not make this but at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Et s'il n'y a pas cet instrument, prenez un chien et mettez-lui une croche de fer dans la bouche, afin que la bouche du malade n'ait pas trop chaud; car la croche de fer ne fait pas sortir la vapeur brûlante de la bouche, et c'est un bon remède ensemble salutaire.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Several times it hurts in the throat bone or spine of fish, or nothing at all; so it is necessary that you should take what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see movement in the thing; and what does not open up for you and is put back in the throat, it is necessary that you make him vomit in such a way that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps he will regurgitate a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or an old crust of bread; and you attach the string to the sponge, and then you swallow it; and when it comes to the place, if it hurts, then draw strongly; and if it does not come out with the above, then take the instrument of plunging according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instrument be curved at the tip so that it can enter the throat more easily and lift the tip higher up; and beware of touching the epiglottis, so that none of it comes to the back of the throat or pushes the bone in; and move it gently so that the patient does not cough it out, for if he coughs it out, he will move it gently or push it back; if it goes down, let him pull it all the way back up.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the fluid in the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Once the medicine has been used as I said in the division for the treatment of medicines; and when it does not benefit, then look in the sun to the throat of the patient, because you press the tongue to the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the fluid, let it run down all the way to the small hook, or tiny claws that are worth to him.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a shawl, and pour it down the throat of the patient, then pour or pour from the collar of the dog, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	If the patient is scalded with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full goblet of cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it down as if to choke, and move it in his hand often; and if soon after he feels the water, then spit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if he does not spit as we have said, then smoke the patient with assafetida, using the instrument that I spoke of in the smoking of the wound; do this many times, for it will not make him gag.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of smoking as follows: you should squeeze the juice out of the charcoal and place it under a coverlet so that it covers the whole thing, and in that hole put the instrument; then pour your smoke, and the patient puts the top of the collar in his mouth, and closes his mouth, so that the smoke does not escape, but comes to the throat; and the throat will now start to burn, and if it does not, then begin the smoking again many times; and make the patient thirsty, and give him salty things to drink and nothing to drink but water; and then, by this government, what is right for him.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument is as though one had twisted snares bent for entering into the throat; and it resembles a beak, and has a roughness of lime, so that whoever takes hold of it cannot let go; and thus is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the capiters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Mouths of apparent abscesses are, according to what the memory comes here before one and the other in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways, the first of which is in its own semblance, and from that which it holds moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the joints where they are at a corner.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscess in the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess in the cheek is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if at abscesses one must not pierce, as long as the bowels are dead according to their course; and if at such that it is necessary to pierce when they are cured, and do not die according to their course, as in an abscess of delicate joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from delicate joints, and one leaves them as long as they are pus-filled inside, there is a risk that the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, which causes contracture in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or if the abscess is in the principal limb, and you delay the perforation as long as it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; or if it is in the fundament, then you pierce it so that it does not die; and one must not pierce an abscess that has been cured without a complete digestion, lest that which is in the fundament be pus-filled inside, and come out as a fistula; and cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	Et it is necessary that you know the time of piercing the abscess which is bloody according to the fulfillment, and this is when the pain is calm, and the departure of the fever, and the easing of the pain and rash, and the discussion and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing where there is more ease for the abscess, and at the place where it opens; and let the piercing be long in the neck, and the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and sides and arteries, and everywhere they are even, and there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, it is according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when the abscess is in a swollen place, if it seems to you that you should let the piercing remain until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	Car if you pierce him before this, if you draw out the blood from his veins, and it is full of dung; and by chance harden his lips and his palate.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscess that are pierced according to the length of the body, according to which the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you shall bring small abscesses, small punctures; and in great abscesses, great punctures, and many wounds according to the appearance of their greatness; and if at any such abscesses one should cover with a cloth, and bandage; when they are well healed as sheets, and are softened, so that they are made as it were a fabric: and if there are any that are torn in three angles, and if there are any that are to be covered like a mint leaf, as it were an abscess of horns; and if there are any that are to be cut into circles, and other cuts and shapes that are to be covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the hopes of the bow do not move at all with the exit of the arrow, for fear that the patient will die, and you will not notice it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So avoid this medicine with great caution, and when you have pricked your abscess, if the wound is shallow, then bind it with linen or old cotton; and if it's a large abscess and there are many pustules, then let each one of them come together like a pouch so that they touch each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a piece of skin, and you have sewed it up, then fill it with wet cotton or wool from flax, bound it tightly for three days; then open it, and wrap the bone in poultice as long as it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is blood coming out from the wound, if you bring cold water quickly and easily, and wet the cloth, and put it on the wound running, many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the blood flowing from the wound persists, if you bring it cold water quickly and easily, and wet the cloth, and put it on the running wound many times. If this does not work, you shall bring the government and cure, and the powders that I have said to put in their places in this book, and if there is an arrow inside, and the base of the leus or the aposteme is nervous, you shall know that you should put on tents and cloth wet with wine and oil; and if it is gangrene, and the leus is fleshy, then you shall wet the cloth with water and oil, or with cold wine, for three days, as we have said; and then clean out the aposteme and dry it and cure it, as it should be, until he is healthy.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this is known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one should go about the treatment of abscesses, and here is the ointment.
des soros	abscesses
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come out, and are handled in such a way that they become threads, just as the jaw of a goat, and many have similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and also ones where there is moisture as well, like poultry; and some that are hard and bony at the base, and there is no doubt that the artery does not cause obstruction.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the torso so that you test all the instrument called "intrusive", from which the form comes out afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, and then let it be pushed upwards with a long one.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	Et when the moisture is gone, if you do not let the hair that contains this moisture dry out, for it returns to its place when left alone; then dip a cotton ball in Egyptian oil, if there is any; otherwise, in water and wax, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day; and he who has been delayed will be healed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the cotton begins to dry again on the second day, and the ointment, as long as you know that it does not stay wet; then heal the wound with ointment suitable for the purpose, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds only a little pus, if the wound is healed according to this form, then you shall cut your hair, and peel it all over, and apply all your cure inside the coat where it is; and if the artery makes you contrary, do what I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is painful, and cut the hair and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut the hair on the painful abscess and wet it, for it is lighter because there is less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if there is no moisture in any of these abscesses or the head, and I found one of these abscesses as a large, hard, and bleached stone, which could not be broken; and had any been hit, it would also have caused a wound like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses that come out of the head, these should be cut off at their most dependent part so that the bowels are emptied; and treated as necessary.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times there is an abscess in the neck, and they open the arteries, and they come from the angry, and never come to another place or to the heart, and they are rotten, and they are entangled with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And every scar is properly inside its rib, as the neck and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scars are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	in those that you see of good disposition to the toque, and are similar in color to the color of the flesh, and do not move from any part and are not deep; so that you cut them from above, and you scorch each part, and the two lips of the mouth remain as they were, if you need it, as we have said in the abscess of the head; and little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and is not too thick or too deep, that the hand does not escape, and do not look forward too much, that you do not cut more than you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work, then put vitriolic acid on it, or some powders that stop the flow of blood, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound is softened, and start rotting.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has healed, if you return to your work, until you have finished it; then examine your index finger for any small scars, if they remain, cut them and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scab, then it only needs that you cut this scab at its root, but let it hang by a strong double thread, and leave it like that without any harm; then bind the wound with cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and then heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have all the scrofula, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, so that there is no delay because of its great size.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you heed to cover the root of it, and draw it forth strongly, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce them so that they die; and pierce them in the same way as that which has been said before, depending on it, then put on with care and similar things, so that they corrupt who are delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well washed, apply ointment of healing, often.
de squinance	of squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancient ones spoke of the tailleure of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and it is the scriptural word of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have squint, it is necessary that the split of the throat which is called "epiglotte" be removed; and one should not seek help from anyone because all the veins and the poring of the patient are to those who have a hot abscess in the mouth or in the throat or in the two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the channel of the pore, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglotte, that we do so with three circles or four small splits from one side to the other, between the two circles or with the quantity of the split of the syringe, not in the cartilage; and these are adaptable to the splitting of the epiglotte so that there is no obstacle, and the vessel is long enough for this.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	Et si le maître est effrayé, alors il doit étendre la peau de la gorge jusqu'à ce qu'elle atteigne la mâchoire ; puis, éviter les vaisseaux sanguins, s'il ne voit aucune chose, et ensuite appliquer le médicament, comme nous l'avons dit ; et cela est démontré par la section du flux sanguin de la mâchoire qui gicle à partir du trou percé, et par l'absence de voix ; et laisse la plaie ouverte une pièce.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hour has passed when one is doubtful about strangulation, then join the two lips of the wound together, and all the flesh comes off the cartilage; then administer medications that cause gas to form, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albu casim says that one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the failure causes one to lose their voice.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Adonques, cope on l'epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII. Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	And then, cut off the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and this will keep them from dying; and the elder man ordered that the wound be left open as long as the evil of the disease has not passed, and it has passed in III days or in IIII. And then he ordered to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed; and I will tell you what I saw. I saw that a young lady took a knife, and put it in her throat, and cut off part of her windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and I found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had issued from it; and I knew that it had not been cut in vain, but that it went right into the throat, and the life was going out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was well; and there came to the damsel nothing but a red voice, and she returned to her own condition; so that I said that in the sewing of the epiglottis there had been no need to fear anything.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	is called "hernia of the throat", and is a great abscess in the color of a jasper, and is very common in women; and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; where there is no fault at all.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to two manners: which one is like fat us, and the other manner is like an abscess that comes from us of the artery; and there is fear, and it cannot be done to fire anyone but in the little one, and test and search everywhere the intruder: if you find it like this too, as the fat does not hurt us at all, if he copes, or even copes our hair, and checks it well, if there is any; and search well soon, and cure him as well as he deserves, until he is completely healed.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to describe us, of which I will discuss all the similarities; and now it is appropriate for me to make the distinction between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that fever and chills persist until the sweating is over, and then the purging is complete; afterwards, rest the fever and the heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us there is no fever or chill or pain, and the remedy is ready, which is according to the color of the skin, and begins also like a seed, and becomes large; and are according to their appearances, whether fat or moist, and much of a color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to cure the patient, that you test and question first all the instruments which are called "entremissoire", according to what their shape will bring or the paste that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for probing an abscess is that you squeeze as much moisture as you can find in the abscess, and then move your fingers little by little until you feel that the instrument has entered completely, then it should be done according to the size of the abscess; then remove the probe, and take care not to hurt yourself.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If there is a lot of moisture in the abscess, which color it has, then do as I said with the other abscesses; and if after the probe there is no moisture, know that it is fat, so do it crosswise, and take hold of it with pliers, and peel it gently from each side and pay attention to where it lies so that you pull it out healthy with the knot; and if you cannot pull it out healthy, then pull it off in pieces so that nothing stays there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if there is no delay at all, it returns to us many times; and if there is only a little delay, and does not trouble you, employ the wound with some corrosive powdery water, and extract the wound, and put on things that calm the wound gently, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if we are in great pain, so count the two lips of the wound, and cure it with the one who causes it to swell.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against or otherwise hurts you, so hurry and employ the place of vitriole broie, and let it be II or III days, until the wound is putrid, and rest the incision of blood; then return to that which was delayed by the knot.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Look here at the shapes of the instruments that are inserted, and they are of three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and they are also like the needles from which sorcerers are made, and they are of yellow bronze, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more proven to make a loud noise to enclose the corbels of fistula; and they are of three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the apertures.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the horses are from many appearances, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and if to the horses that have two combs of three ways also; and if to the horses that have three combs and are also of three ways; and if to the horses that have two combs, and horse with one comb only, and are also of three ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The shapes of the horses are from many appearances, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and if to the horses that have two combs of three ways also; and if to the horses that have three combs and are also of three ways; and if to the horses that have two combs, and horse with one comb only, and are also of three ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and place it back at the site of the injury that heals with the combination of veins, arteries, and never according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never does the breast of certain men swell when they begin to rot, as if it were the breast of a woman; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to heal them must do so according to this form of the line: b. to g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then skin the fat and apply medicine to the wound, keeping it wet with tar that burns; then join together the two lips of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it is healed; and if it is not healed or if the incision has not been completed, so that the disease does not return, you must fill the wound with moistened cotton immersed in a corrosive tar; and leave it until the余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余 余
des apostemes des asselles	of the heels
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	are caused by hard scrofulous nodules or blisters, and if there is only moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	So then those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bow in the abscess is empty, then pack it with dry cotton, and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as long as it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if the wound makes a bow, then apply fire cautery as we have described before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is tight, then often comes an abscess, and all comes to a burst vein and an abscess; and if you feel it with your finger, you feel an extraction; and if it is for a vein, you should move away from it apparently; and this is madness to pack this abscess, and especially when it is in the heels and ankles and neck and mouth of others, and there are many.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary therefore to avoid the use of iron cure, and that which is at the shoulder also needs to be avoided, and in that which is swollen with an artery, make a cut on top of the skin from long; then perform the incision as one does, and separate the artery from the threads clearly, as much as it is uncovered; then insert a needle into it, and make it pierce up to the other side, and draw out the artery with two threads according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples; then untie the knot that is between the two bonds of an introducer until there is nothing left, and release the artery; then apply the cure that I have described, so that the thread chokes; then cure this one with ointment coming before this one, until it is healed; and if the artery is cut for the vein, it is necessary that you hold what you can of the artery to all the skin, then insert a needle from side to side, and let it have two threads, so that you pull it from the other side; then tie the artery as I told you, or tie one of the two parts to the two bonds of the thread; and if you doubt whether the thread has gone out, then put another needle on all the thread, from top to bottom of the skin, and draw out the threads in four threads; then cut off the artery until there is no excess, and also cut off the knot and leave what is tied; then put it on a wet towel soaked with wine and oil, and apply cures of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As well as coming from the artery and vein, they come from the nerves of the neck when they are injured, or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And that which happens more often to the shoulder and arms and in all of their joints, and this is a painful aphorism, and its color seems like the color of the heart, and it is in many dispositions without pain; and when it is stretched out, if the patient feels pain, and is not completely hard throughout, but mutates well on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor up nor down, and the one who is in the joints does not come together with force: perhaps there will be contraction; and that which is at the top of the head or the forehead, it makes the skin stretch out.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the aphorism is small, if he has a nail, and cuts it at its root; and if it is large, if it hangs on the hook, and scorches it, then the bone and assembles the wound to the stitch, and cures it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	The large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	There was once in the wombs and nowhere else in the body, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" by appearance, and it is the subtle root, and the big chied; and there are small ones and large ones; and I saw one man who had two or three bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and they were torn open, and they ran with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I took them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI Z., and the ovations in the incision so that you look at the patient is moist, and the color of the artel is white and moist and has a subtle root; so cope with the spatula wide, and be in your presence the fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to treat the leprosy after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the wound is well
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes by cauterization of a wound or cut of syphilis, and it is on the belly and there are some boils, as it happened in other cuts, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is in front, or of wind; and if it's because of the cut of the syphilis and the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess looks like the color of the flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and opening of different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's because of the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press it to its two sides so that it turns, and then returns, and perhaps it is locked, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath, and by strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, then this is a light thing, and open well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain; and if it is due to blood, then open by these signs the large and hard absesses, and are fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then it is hot at the base, and the opening is so that you observe that its appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is appropriate that you leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I told you before, or chapistre the absesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it is due to the bowel or bloat, then order the patient that he dyes his hair, and be extended all right, then sign all around the bloated; then order him to swell gently between your hands, then take all of the absesse up to all the large curve; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or rope, and let it hang; then operate on half of the absesse stretched out on the thread, and dip your index finger, and feel the bowel; if you find it caught on the thread, then release it, and dip the bowel at the far end of the abdomen; and if you find the bloat, then take it to the curve, and cut off the excess; and if the artery opposes you, or the vein, then go in, then return to your work and take two needles, and dip them in thread, and dip the two needles into what you have made a cross that you made pierce; then strain the absesse in four directions on the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the thread hanging as long as it putrefies, and cut off the bad part by itself; or you chop it when it is thin and putrid, then cure what needs to be cured, and cut off the absesse as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place from what is due, and weld the place.
dou chancre	dou Chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	dou Chancre
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the incisions, when they are in their place and you can remove them, as we have said, do so by purging the disease of black bile once; then make the patient well if he shows evident repletion, then afire the patient with good heat for incising; then pour your oncines or cancer, and hair all over, and break open the bone all over without leaving any; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze it hard at your hand or at anything, and if the blood flowings oppose the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the flux is staunched; then treat with other treatments until he is cured.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	From dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	a point, and be cut from two parts. On the skin, and let it hang down so that it dangles as much as possible when you put it on, and look whether the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: then you should cut upwards from the knuckle of the little finger; and if it is due to liver disease, you should cut at the left knuckle; and if it is due to fat, you should cut at the right, and let the weak liquid run out; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and pour it out, and hold your hand over all the spatumile between the skin and the sinew as much as one fingernail or more; then pierce the sinew until the spatumile comes to the level of the water, and then lift it up, and pour out this instrument where there is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Et est semblant à une caine d'argent subtil, et est d'airain ou d'archut léger, et a en la partie desoz i petit pertus; et ou coûté d'une part, III pertus; et II d'autre part, et I d'autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c'est li forme de l'incision dont li scribes taille la penne:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And is like a silver-white cane, and is of brass or light copper, and has in the middle a small hole; and where it costs on one side, III holes; and II on another side, and I on another; and is the head cut so as to look like a pen, and this is the shape of the incision which the scribes cut the pen:
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt the disease, and you leave it wet, whether the cure of the grave or sand is hot, and by sweating or bathing in water and in the sun, and if it becomes dark from drinking; and the cure of drying medicines as long as he is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I said above.
de l’estopement de la verge	For stopping the flow of semen
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Do not give birth to a child who does not have an obstruction in the penis, or if the obstruction is small, or if it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If, at some point, he does not pierce the most delicate part of the sperm with this method:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then, put the narrow part of the penis, which is very delicate, according to this form: and tie it and hold it like that for three days or four; and when it begins to urinate, if the tip remains closed, let the urine flow, and then reset it; and perhaps it will not be noticed, because the urine that comes out strongly does not leave the tip closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The tongue of which the hole is tight, if it is medicine with a drop of wine, as we have said, if it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hernia in its natural place are blighted, because no child is born with a hernia at the root of the penis, for it cannot urinate until it raises its penis; and cannot ejaculate unless the material can come out as far as the testicles, and this is a very bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way to work on it is that the patient lies down flat on his back, then the root of the penis and the scrotum are like the size of a feather; so that the hernia pops in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against an escape of blood which often comes, and if it escapes, let the one who escapes bleed, and cure the wound until it is well.
des pustules de la verge	of the warts of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Several times a warts come in the penis, and has an ugly appearance; and there are evil and not evil; so you must squeeze them with a fine needle and clean them all, then put cotton wet in Egyptian ointment; then cure it with diafinicon as long as he is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the warts are evil, of purple color and depleting, you must bring fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cleaned it, and if the warts are in the tip of the penis, and some part is inside the skin and another part outside, you must first remove the warts that are inside; and when they are sewn, then cure the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, if the head of the penis is not assured, it may be pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in his penis and where coion; so you must burn all that is black and corrupted, then put on plaster made of honey and flour which is made from apple tree bark and dates, and then cure with other cures as long as he is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if pain comes, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: For exudation of blood, as when there is corruption; and if the foreskin is corrupted and withdrawn, then you should boil or cut with an iron knife a cord from the penis, and let the patient pee; and since, if it is a grief thing to speak of that, then you should scrape it with a spatumil any where on the head of the penis and the skin; then carefully separate them, and place a thin cloth of linen wet in cold water, so that it does not scar again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a continuous wound if it is like the other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our will and especially on children, it is necessary to do it in the best way and with the least effort for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old people did not mention circumcision of their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we only have this by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have heard the greatest part of the masters and the wise people who made circumcision between Y-d’Or and with force and for all kinds of things; so it was that he cut off the skin, and by chance if one cut on that, he delayed that one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or it heals over again, and the pain is doubled, and the cleaning which comes from there is not certain at all; and by chance if one cuts on that, the nail also breaks, and the work is ruined, and often they are born like this so that there is no need for cleaning, and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	I have found the goodness of the experiment in the mouth-washing that is done at all times with such force; for the force cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, cut it evenly all around; but the thread should be well wrapped around the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he hears, that you do not force the thread tightly around the peg so much, and then let it slide in all directions as you can; then let it rest between your hands straight, and turn the forces between your hands or toes so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then bottle your hand to the peg and blow or suck, and turn it upwards so that the head of the peg is in place; then clean it well of the dirt that has gathered on it, then tie the thread tightly with a double knot, then tie one end to the other; and hold it between the two knots at the second knothole, and cut between the two threads, then lay the thread flat on top of the powder, then wrap the powder with glue made from cooked sheep's milk and good rosewater oil, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with other remedies until it is well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for washing is this: The two shoulders are soft and bendable, and the shoulder bones are also long and even.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of washing is when the needle slips during incisions; so you must stretch it out to your nail, so that the thread forms an abscess, and evenly, and if you cannot hold it in place with your finger, then hold it between pliers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it continues for three days, and that which is sore at the root of the penis is swollen, if he leaves it until the abscess has dried up and the scab has formed, and lightly scratches it; if you can move it thus, and keep away from the part near the root of the penis, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the raw places of the body with powder, which we have spoken of in the treatment of powders, and if the application of the powder is too much, and it goes up, it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	dou retenement de l’urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to a stone in the urinary tract, or frozen blood, or a bowel obstruction, or hay fever, or similar things which we have mentioned in the division; and if the urine does not pass, and you see that the retention is for the stone which is at the neck of the bladder, or at the top of the spine, it is necessary that the patient lie on his back; and let him be placed on his side with his feet raised above his head, and stretch out his torso on the side opposite from the spine, and restrain the patient so that he remains in this position as much as he can; and then it is necessary to hold the bladder at the top of the spine, by means of a tool called a “syringe”, whose shape is as follows: and let it be made of fine lightweight silver, like the feathers of a swallow; and let the tube be about one palm long and half a palm wide, and let it be thin at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the way of the issuing of the urine is that you take I double thread, and tie at the chief a piece of wool or of cotton, and bottle the chief with the thread within the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and the bottle up to the chief of the syringe, then oint the syringe with oil or with butter and with a few drops of vinegar, and set the patient upon a chair, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and with olive oil and with water; then put lightly the syringe within the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the bottle; then bottle the syringe before jusc’to the bladder, and let the patient come up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order but that where you are leading him or she goes there bent; then take the thread completely all around the piece of wool and the piece of wool, and the urine follows the wool, then remove it forcefully, and make the urine run; and recommence the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and keep the patient well.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or boils come to the bladder, and it is swollen, and you see it distilling water and medicines, then do this with all the instrument which is called "clepsydra", and that form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has III outlets: II from one part, and I from another, as you see; and let the hair grow by which the medicine drops so that it stops well in the root without addition, if one can draw out the moisture, and pour when the need is there; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, put the head of the cane in the moisture, and traing while you are doing so; if you draw out the moisture with the head, and then rebounce it strongly forward; if it will enter the moisture and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clistere with which one makes the bladder clistere: it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or bronze, and the head is above; and desos to the I heart or the ligamen knot; then take a bladder of sheep and put the moisture that you have seen to clisterize the bladder, then tie it between the II bladders formed of a good double thread, and heat that moisture on fire; then bottle the chief with the bladder, then strain your hand over the bladder towards all the moisture, until the patient feels that that moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make I circle, and pierce it roundly around; then bottle a thread in these openings, then assemble the circle as one assembles a dal, and put in it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it on the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until that moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the ways of stone and extraction in general, and I have explained the difference between a stone that has been pushed out by its own power and those that have been pushed out with force; and as for the stone, I must tell you openly and briefly about its size. And as for the bladder and the penis, I will tell you openly and briefly about them.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is stuck in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the water jumps out of the bladder, resembling water in its subtlety; and when it opens, it hurts the patient's penis, and it does so many times, and then it becomes smooth again; and the foundation is lost; and the recovery is lighter in children up to the age of four, and it is heavier in older people, and it is weaker between middle age and old age; and the cure is easier for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is appropriate first to purify the patient by enemas, to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it never hinders to seek help from a doctor.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the legs and move them to dislodge them, so that the stone goes down to the bottom of the bladder, and does not remain in place; then make him sit with his hands between his legs, and his thighs apart, so that the bladder is all turned towards the bottom; then feel and touch inside; if you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she does not pee when touched all over, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is old and complete, and the bottle in its base, and feel for the stone, and if you feel it on your index, press on the neck of the bladder; then push from above with your index, and pour into its outlet, where you see the cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder to his hand, and he commands that he extends to his right hand the testicles above, and with his left hand he holds the skin which is behind the testicles in the part where one makes the size; then he drinks the seed of copulation, for this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the foundation, not in the middle but near the side of the left hip; and let it be four inches long, and two inches deep, according to the quantity of stone, not too large; for fear that if you press there, which is at the foundation, it will cause pain without working; and know that there is a part of stone where it has angles and edges: such is easy to cut; and if it is round like a glans, its issue is lighter.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A cell so that it has angles and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not bend, then it is necessary that you stretch it with pliers which are like a file on the head, to move the stone so that it does not escape; or you blow into an instrument which is sharp at the end attached to the head; and if you cannot engage it in this way, then it is necessary to open it slightly with a sharp tool, and if it is peeled off, then apply vitriolic acid; and if there are more than one stone, first blow the largest one onto the bladder neck, then cover it, then sharpen it, and the smaller ones after that if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If it is very large, it is necessary to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things come to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out by itself because the thread that holds it does not close; but anyway you push to extract it, or with pliers, piece by piece; and when you have finished your task, if you apply heat to the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and squeeze it, and put it on a wet cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to calm the abscess; then remove the patient's tie completely by the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, if you raise it up with oil and water, then cure it with ash and basil, until it is well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and congealed blood in the bladder, and be retained by it so that it is thrown out with urine in this or that way: then you must put your hand on the wound, and extract the blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and pour it out; then lift the wound with water and ash and rope, and aid it in all ways that you can, until it is well; and it is necessary that you bind both legs, and gather the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is down in the bladder, and stuck in, and the urine cannot come out; if you cure it as I have said above, that you cut many times, then excuse the cutting because of this cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proven this out.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take iron, forge it according to this form, and make it into three angles, welded together like a bar.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and polish the edge of the chisel against a stone so that it cannot come out of the hole; then insert the chisel into the stone lightly, until it comes to a stop; and then slowly turn the chisel in your hand towards the stone again and again until you can pierce the stone from the other side; and then soon after urine will flow; then press your hand onto what is stuck in the stone.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is quickly injured and jumps out with the urine, and the disease is gone; and if you cannot do this in any other way that hurts it, then file the edge of the stone and another on top, and make the chisel go between the two lines, and pull it out sharply, and then remove the line from above, and wash the frozen blood that is in the wound; and treat it until it is well.
de la piere des femmes	of women's stones
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	There is a chance that the stone is lodged in women and if there is no one time, this is a painful cure and is guarded by three things: one is that per adventure the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman well-informed who undresses herself to the mirth, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that one cannot find a woman well-informed in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman is more perfectly formed than the stone in man, so that it requires deeper cutting, and there is much fear of it. And if necessity demands it, you should go to a midwife who is well-informed, and with very little she will come, and if you don't find her, do not seek her; but rather I cast her out of your city: then she should throw down her foot or foundation and want for the stone; and if she finds it, she should bind herself by oath that she shall cut off her foot or hand with the disease, and will and press her left hand on her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she tears, so that it moves from the bladder's entrance to the anus, gradually until it reaches the root of the thigh; then chop on top of the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle where it is moved, and feel the bone in that part; and do not move your two above the bone or anus, and make a small cut; then pour oil into the wound, if you feel the bone so acutely towards the wound as long as the bone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and which have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the appearance, then know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't go away, put vinegar on the spot, and keep it there for an hour until the wound is cleaned; then return to your work, as long as the stone is gone, and have the tools I told you about in drawing out the stone to help you with your task; and if it doesn't go away, and it's a artery that has been cut, put powder on the spot, drain the blood and lard, and don't repeat this, and leave the stone behind, and don't draw it out, unless by chance the sick person dies; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the fire has subsided and the blood is cool, and the leather is soft, if it returns to your work, as long as the stone is hard.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia causer
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The water of the sea is not other than the gathering of white or salt water, which is separated from the egg by the skin, and is called "salt", and is never truly in the shell of the egg, if we believe that it is another egg; and this skin between the white salt water is what we have said; and this does not happen to be wrong.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of this hernia is so weak that it comes out through the organs, and that material spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And it never comes from beating on the organs, and this water has many colors: or it is color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and so forth; and these are the signs of this gathering, for if it is white salt water as we have said, then the abscesses are round, a long figure like an egg, and do not open the organs, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the own towel, then is the abscess with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the leather of the coions and the white syfac, then does it smell bad. So when you know the color of the moisture, then try on all the quire, from which its form is as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the quire, judge who is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cure it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the repletion of his body; then let him sit on his back, on something a little high, and spread out for him some beds; then let him sit on his left side, and order the minister that he sit on his right, and extend the staff to one of the two ribs between the two coions; then take the spatumile rod, and wrap it around the leather of the coions among them until the end of the hand, and cut off the leather of the coions little by little according to the power; then pierce the white syfac with water at a large opening, and drain all the water, and then put on the scales, and close up the syfac upstream; and do not touch the keur of the coions, but only the syfac; wrap it all around or in pieces separately the coster of him carefully, for if you do not wrap it well, the water will return; and if the egg was too far from your work, let it go back to its place when you have finished working on the syfac; then assemble the two keurs of the coions with a seam, and then heal it like the other wounds until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs in doubt of the decay of blood; then take out the egg and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, knowing that they are two branches; then take out the other part as you did with the first, evenly, and clean the blood, and put on another wound with oil rosin; and put away another wool moistened with wine and oil, and put the two eggs, and put double sheets over them, and tie it all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two sheets, and fill them with wool swabs according to this form and join them together by stitching in the girdle of the braies, and let one of the shoulders rest on the foundation until the back, and the other at the arm part; and let the other two heads be joined together above the two arms, so that all is joined together by the restraint in the loop of the girdle; and is not medicined this ramice of cauterizing in heat of iron, but that you press the subtile cautery, and cut the skin of the eggs, and scorch it with this hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And pound the paste in all ways that you can, until it is finished; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is safer; and guard against the evacuation of blood, and move that the work of the incision does not bother; and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or an evacuation of blood or something else, cure what bothers you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this treatment because of its horror, then introduce a perforation, as I have said, and it is that when you are sure with the meanings that we have said that ramices water is there, then make sit the patient on one raised seat; since then cut the abscess at the part that is sore all over, and put the perforation of the long neck through; and make the opening wide, so that all the water runs out; then put cotton on the place, and tie it, and leave it to run out the remaining water, then cure it as long as the wound heals; and if the white cloth does not let the water come out into the mouth of the wound, then you must put in it a feather or the instrument that collects the water from the drops, so that it forms as before; and open the wound slightly, and know that the water returns, and is gathered after VI months or so, and when it is gathered as before, then such will be the course of the patient's illness.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I know that in this part of the text there are many possible interpretations, so I believe it is better to let it be; and I will tell you about the procedure and the appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from the testes, and least often from the scrotum; and this happens mostly.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is what I mean: with acidic superfluity that spreads to the testes, or by impact; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the testicle; it does not cause pain, and it is a painful abscess; and sometimes there is an abscess that is painful and dangerous, and its color is dark, and it never comes from a vein, or from the swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from a vein, if you place the thumb on it, and do not touch it,
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Cil qui est fais d'enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition à l'expression du toucher des deux, et peut avoir bien faire la taille sur ceste semblence, et sur les autres chars; et est que tu coupe le cur des coions, puis estent l'uef en haut, et le trai fur dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l'uef.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	The dislocated shoulder, when treated with warmth and massaged, can be reset; however, if it is painful and difficult to move, it should be left alone for a while. When the pain subsides, gentle movements can be introduced to restore range of motion. If the pain persists, it may be necessary to consult a specialist.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the dislocation is located behind the shoulder, it should be carefully reset by a professional. The patient should avoid moving their arm and seek medical attention if pain or numbness persists.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is finished, if you employ the wound with wool wetted in oil and wine, then he will be cured of other ailments until he is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscesses of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is one of the most popular treatments for the disease: wrap the testicles in a poultice of herbs, and soften the testes with oil; then the patient will groan painfully when he moves them, and this treatment for this disease is very similar to what has been described above, and I will tell you the work on it, according to that which the old people did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a soft seat, then pour the poultice over the testes until it is completely covered, and then wrap it tightly; then take a string and tie it around each testicle at both ends, making it tight, so that it does not move or stretch, and then cut off the excess string, just as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in temples; then insert an awl or needle with double thread, and secure it to the first place where the vein has come, and then tie it tightly at the other end; then wrap them around properly, according to the length of the body, and extract the moisture that is corrupt; then cure the wound as you would a Bowen's wound, so that no one of the testes is cut off by the incision of the strings, and they dry up and do not heal.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the skin
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	the signs of this ringworm if it is that it comes and goes little by little in a long time, and does not come all at once; and the sores are even until almost completely healed, so that the ringworm hurries the sore to heal.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	and the signs are that when it is a ringworm section, it brings about sudden pain, and the sores appear different, with hair falling out in patches, which is due to the exit of the intestine and the course of the ringworm.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	and it never comes out with the intestine, and is kept back, and causes great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments of iron for fear, because it is necessary to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of iron for fear, because it is necessary to avoid them. Tell the patient that he should keep his intestines inside in the wound, if he can; then tie him from his neck between your hands, and loosen the intestines; then take off the skin from the sides of the loins according to what you need to open the wound, and let it be so that the iron comes out; then remove the fat that is under the skin, until the white fat that is underneath the skin is exposed completely; then put your index finger in the place that lies between the white fat that is underneath the skin and between the loin, and between the second fat and between the loin; and when you feel the intestine wrapped around or hard white fat, and if you do not find any of this, let it come out to the navel; then take a needle that has thick thread made of XX threads, and put it in the back part of the fat, which is behind the skin of the loins; after the spine, then tie the threads so that there are IV threads; then assemble them one above the other in the form of a cross, and tie the fat, which we have said is underneath the skin, with a strong thread of II parts; then wrap the threads around, and tie them together, so that no part of the thread can enter into the navel, that an abscess does not come up; and above this, according to the length that the iron carries, leave a space of one finger from the fat that is underneath the skin; and after all, do the same according to the circumference that the iron bears; then wrap it in the part that is behind the skin of the loins, until it fits well, and tie it, as we have said before; then bring moist wool and put it in the wounds, and wrap the thread that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And never is cauterized the white flesh we have said, after the incision, by doubt of decimation of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it bleeds itself; and if it delays in bleeding, let it be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it bleeds; then heal the wound with other cure, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia cow-stomach
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	I never saw anyone in this district who dared to make the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old man said that it is made thus: as you tie together the legs of a lamb after butchering it with light strokes on the back of the leg, then cut off the foot and cure the abscess of him who has it, until the legs bleed; and treat it as we have said, until he is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes without a wound in the guts, as we have said, and open the channels; and do not release any of the intestines to the bowels, and if you do, it is little, and repair every hour; and nevertheless, if he stays too long in this place, if he thinks that the wound or the pus is there, as much as the intestines release; and what happens because of the extension of the pus that is in the guts, as we have said, for it is extended, then it softens and swell the channels and open them; and the cure is by cautery, as we have already said; and is never cured with iron in this way: but he should lie often on his back between your hands, then cut the place of the wound with a large needle according to the quantity of III days; and then extract the pus that is under the skin that covers it, and then take the thread and tie it on the visible place of the pus; and press it perfectly over the belly, then cut the two visible channels of the pus on the top of the thread, and cut them both; then remove the top of the thread, and do not cover the pus or stretch it with anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the intestine ramose; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you dress the wound, if the flesh is infected, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syrup is constricting, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterization is moist in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the leather of the shoes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the shoes becomes softened in certain men, because the balls that are inside them are softened, and it is difficult to see; and it is necessary, when you dress it, to make a hole on his back, and to cut off the softened leather over the natural leather; then join the two lips together with one seam or three firmly; then sew between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it is healthy, and cut off the excess.
dou chastrement	dou cautere
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For I know that this treatment is against our custom, and for this reason I would not like to speak of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one is that the mare should answer when she is asked, and the other is that we have often had to use the treatment of certain animals to help us, such as rams and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say therefore that treatment is done according to two ways: either by attraction or by a cut.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In that way, which we do by attraction, we should sit the animal in hot water until the joint is softened and still; then grasp it with your hand, until it has healed and you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of the treatment of size: it is necessary that you get the animal wet, and then press the skin of the joints with your left hand, and then tie the suspended strap, and loop it over each hoof as you have well scoured them; and leave no puss of the sty or subtle fluid which is under the hooves; and this way of treatment is milder than that which is done by attraction, for by attraction there might stay something in the joints, so that the animal desires lust; then heal the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to two manners as men: one is that between the two testicles it opens up like the figure of nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes in its scrotum there is urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other manner is in women, and has on the loins like a penis and two testicles.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure for male and female is that you copulate with joined ones all, and treat them so as others wounds; in the second manner, of men from whose scrotum urine jumps out, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tentacle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Is a joined one on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it also very much like a hand, and that is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you take off the surplus of the tentacle from your hand or oncines, and join it lightly; and do not cut it too much completely, lest there be an escape of blood, then cure it with another cure as long as it is sound; and with another joined one that comes out at the mouth of the mare, and employ it, and perhaps it jumps away, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the "old cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it off, as we have said, the testicle, and cure it until it is well.
de erratique	of errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	If it is errant, so is the nature of the female who has not yet reached her time, or if the hernia is small; and is natured by birth, or accident through illness that has come about; or because she has been charitably carried, or with a subtle or bitter substance, and has been made perfect in marriage, or at cost, or delay, or whichever way it may be; and it prevents her from conceiving, giving birth, and perhaps growing flowers to bear; and the knowledge of this is through the use of medicine.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the hernia protrudes, it will soon appear, whether towards your breasts or towards the right or left.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a subtle medicine, and it is close to the liver, if you hurry and turn it over: place your two fingers together, and let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two leeches, until the subtle medicine has run, and the hernia has been pulled; then take wool, and moisten it with oil, and put it on the spot, and let the woman lie on her side every day, so that he cannot stick.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the medicine is hard and thick, then you must cut it with the scalpel to make it look like grass.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the poultice is made of sheep's wool, then hang it on the arm and cut it; and add medicines that stop bleeding, such as those mentioned earlier, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of wine; then bring a large piece of linen cloth, so that the wound cannot close; and leave it there for a long time, and apply linseed oil; then treat with other remedies until it heals.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when the wound begins to heal, if you cover it in this way, then there is no risk of an abscess forming.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess that has formed in the wound should not be touched with fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emorrhoids are openings of veins from which, without corticean custom, and when the emorrhoids are old they become thultul; and we have said in the division the appearances of horses, and the signs, and I will say here those who receive cure.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the emorrhoids and the thultul, when they are completely formed in the womb, and do not appear on feeling, except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the womb, one can feel them, are those who can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	It is therefore necessary that you put the woman in a cold house, then are the thultul to the nails, and the cope at its roots, then powder on restraining medicines blood, as it happened here and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then pour its feet against the wall for an hour, then put it in cold water; and if it comes to sanc, then let her sit in a decoction of pomegranate peels and oak galls and gall nuts and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confit it with honey and easily, and make a poultice with it on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if not, then put vinegar on the back and do not hurt them; then take another one, and the juice of plantain or blackberry with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess is healed, treat the wound with oil until it is healthy; and what is called "balath" is red, and resembles sharp grass, so cover it as I have said in the book; and then treat it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	the abscesses of the woman
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses come to the woman, such as syphilis, painful abscess, herpes, festering sores, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscess, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary therefore that I say in this treatise about the warm poultice that comes to the womb, which is not a warm poultice except for its heat; and if you know the work of iron, see how the poultices are heated at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if they become red you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	It is therefore necessary that I say in this treatise about the warm poultice that comes to the womb, which is not a warm poultice except for its heat; and if you know the work of iron, see how the poultices are heated at the beginning of their coming, and full of heat and fever, and if they become red you can see them. Do not therefore hurry to pierce it, but let it die as long as the pain is relieved; and then make it sit on II chairs, or II small chairs where it leans, and support its back and joins its feet to the side of the leg; and let its knees be spread out, and put its arms across its chest, and bind them well with a good bond; then suck his bole towards the left coast, and introduce the instrument with which one works the mouth of the womb, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you stick the ring first to know the depth of the womb, so that what enters through the instrument does not come in more completely than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the womb with cloth, so that the instrument does not harm it; and it is necessary that he put the cone of the instrument on top, and dip the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	Et when the abscess is opened and one pours liquid mold in the hand, if it is convenient to cover the head, let it be done with a sponge; and when the bowels are empty, if you put in the wound wet tents made of oil or green oil, place the tent completely over the wound and over the other side and dip the net in water or cooked berries; then the cure will come after two days of poulticing, until he is healed; and never raise the wound or the skin with hot water and honey, and then only with water or cooked roots and arnica. Then let him return to poulticing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed over the bone, you must be careful not to cook it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	of childbirth It is a craft for the Midwife to know the shape of natural childbirth, and signs if she sees the woman hurry down below, and desire to smell the air: so soon does the child come out; so you know that these childrens are according to the natural shape, and the issue comes from her head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then you should lightly press her belly, so that the child comes soon; for when it descents on her head, if he does the same with him, and is born clean by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes never upon its feet, and comes from the chest or shoulders or the hands, or comes up her belly, or sometimes, and is turned around by chance at her neck, and in other evil shapes; so it is a craft for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how she should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If a man falls upon his head by natural fall, and the woman gives birth groaning, and the virtue of him is weak, if the fat he sits on a saddle, or women hold; and rises its nature of oil or fenugreek is cooked, and then poured the bath between his two little spatumile that here is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If the second one is split, and he copulates with his thumb as much as the moisture that comes out runs away; and he holds his belly so that the baby falls, and if it does not fall, then it is necessary to use fenugreek musk with oil of sisament; then she makes her drink and shake off the condiment, and keeps her mouth and nose closed for an hour: then the baby is born.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	If the two hands go out again, it is necessary that you pull them lightly little by little; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a seat, and let her feet be up; then take off the seat from the ground, and wrap the woman, so that she does not fall when she stands up; and if her hands cannot enter, and the baby dies, then pull his hands with the knife that has been placed before, and pull out the child, and pull them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the child's delivery between his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes down between his feet, then it is necessary to raise him up; and then turn him over little by little until he is even; then squeeze his feet together and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	As soon as he starts to crawl, then instruct him to squeeze his feet together and make them shake a little bit; if he jumps, may God help him.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he doesn't do it as we have said, then turn him over little by little until he is back in his natural position.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he becomes light again.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he doesn' do it as we have said, then take muscillaige of the alders and oil of sesame, and gum melted, and grind them all up in a mortar; and put it on the woman's nature inside and out this ointment, then let her sit in warm water until she is wet all over, then make her sit on a chair, then make her shake and squeeze her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly, because the child doesn't come yet.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the birth of a child from its pelvis
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the baby comes in this form, so I put the ball in my hands little by little; then be tied to his neck, and hang down his feet, and lie on her bed; and fold her hands little by little, and then she takes them on her belly, and pulls the legs out, until she is completely removed; and if the baby does not come, so it takes its feet and moves its body, then moves its belly up, then puts your hands; and bring the baby little by little; and tell the woman to lean back as the baby comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	the issue of a child who comes with one hand extended
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	If the hand cannot be brought back, so the woman should get up and go; if she cannot go, so she should lie down on the bed, and bring her legs together; then I will bring the muscle-binder that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, so she should sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and let the baby come according to its natural form, and make it twist, and tell her to lean back as the baby comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	De the birth of the child on her neck, and spread its hands, and his face turned towards the back of her mother's.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	Now it is appropriate that the child's father hold him, then gently and slowly turn him; and when he is upright, as we have said, then command him to move his arms little by little; and when you have done this, put him in a chair, and command him to lean; and let her shake.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the second
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes in this way at all the second time, so cover the second with your nail, as long as the moisture is empty; and if the child falls on its face and neck, so cover it with a blanket, so that it is not held, and dies the child; then put the child inside, as you have put it in the right way, and command the woman to lean no more: thus move her lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are born often, and never more than three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, and does not happen often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an unusual thing, and do not live, if only one is born; but I know that, when they are multiplied, they are dislocated by the fire that devises them, which is bound to the boude; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	If they are born with pain, as we have said, and the gentle woman does it quickly and lightly; and let her do so as well as she can for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Never are formed in the womb I or II or III or IIII or V or VI or VII or more up to XV, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and the midwives know everything about them, for sometimes similar things happen; so do as it is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman of a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and if it does not come out, and you are forced to use your hands; if it is necessary that you know that the woman is of sound virtue, and has no accident by which she could die; if it is necessary that the woman be bent over her back, and her feet are raised, and her legs are inclined downward; and the minister bleaches her from both sides, or she is tied to the bed so that she cannot be treated for the delivery of the child; then rub her mouth with oil mixed with althaea and fenugrec and linseed seed, then wet her hands with these oils and these muslins; then pour them into her mouth lightly, then wants it to let it come out or he grabs it by its hair that is suitable for this, and takes care that the child is dressed properly so that it gives birth on top of it; if he sticks the hair in her hair, or in her neck, or in her mouth, or under her chin, or around her throat, or near her ribs, and the delivery is on the feet, if he grabs it or sticks it at coster's, and it comes out, it is necessary that he tie the hair to his right hand, and put the scarf between his two hands with his left hand, and pour it lightly with his whole hand, and stick the hair in any of these places that I have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the shape of the hair.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then take another one, or if you need it, so that the extractions are even; and then even them out by moving from one side to the other, so that they can come out, and hold the teeth of the onions so that they can hold, as this is their form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if one part stops, then apply some oil to its two sides and squeeze it in that part, and pull the other part; and if none of it stops, then put this onion or more up high, and do so until all of it comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	and if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by the extraction, then you must wrap it in two sheets until it is all out; then tie it in the joint of the plant or at the neck, and likewise you must do with the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's loins are large and he is straining in delivery, or he has a sharp chief assembled there, then it is necessary that you pound the thorny spine between your two hands, and twist the chief and draw out the sharp one; or you rip it with the implement called an 'almidach', from which the form comes with the instruments or chaplet after this one; and so too naturally the child's loins become large, and then pull out the bones with nippers, and if the loins jump and are drawn by force, so they are split, until the moisture that is in the issue runs; and if it cannot come out, then chop it into pieces with a knife, and if it is swollen in the belly or beyond the sides, then it is necessary that you pierce it as long as the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he is caught by his feet, then the pull is light, and his mouth to the mare's breast is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If he is caught in the abdomen or breast, then you cover him with a drape wrapped around your hand; and cut the abdomen or breast until the moisture that is there comes out; and if another member has come off and stayed put, then press your hand firmly on the mare's breast and draw it towards her mouth; then bind it or tie it and pull it hard; and if her mouth is constricted by a fever that has come to her, she should not be troubled, but should be given moist and greasy things; and give her plasters, and chop in water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If he is caught on his ribcage, and you can make it even, then administer what we have said regarding the living child; and if one has no power, then cut it into pieces, leaving none of the second.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, he shall bring forth what we have said in the chapter of the foot, which comes in the mare; and if blood comes from it, so be it restrained by water, and other remedies are brought.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb an embryo had been killed, then she consulted another one, and it was killed too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the wound in the foot began to putrefy, and it became very bad.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called in to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not stop the wound from bleeding.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong poultice, and in a few days an bone came out, and after some more days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, for this woman's womb had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to examine the wound, and hand-held it while the woman sewed up the hole as well as she could; and waited a long time before tying this piece of cloth onto it; and I do not recall this chapter being mentioned until one day, when the master was examining an unusual thing, he knew how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the shoulder back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	This is followed by the description of the form of the press, how the muscles are attached; and at II turns become II shoulders of II lines.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the knots should be thinner than the strap; and made of ebony or box; and the mouth of the fist should be large, and the edge of the lips I must, and long a palm and half, and these two straps should be joined together by this same piece, which is folded in half on both sides, about a palm long.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, à sa ressemblance plus subtile et plus légère, soit faite de fuste d'ébène ou de buis, selon l'apparence des tenailles; et ait aux deux chaises deux ajoutsements, si com tu vois, d'une palme de long, et deux doigts de large; et quand tu vois ouvrir la marre à tout l'instrument, si fais s'asseoir la femme sur le lit, les pieds pendant et les jambes ouvertes, puis bouttes les deux ajoutsements ajoutés ensemble en la marre, et tiens le chef de l'instrument dosé entre ses cuisses; puis ouvres ta main à tout l'instrument, si com tu as fait aux tenailles égallement, selon la quantité que tu vois ouvrir la bouche de la marre, tant que le balais fasse ce qu'elle veuille.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is all mounted and multiplied for its appearance; and when you see them prepared, the faster they work, and the higher they are for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If I do not trust you with the instrument, then you have not prepared it properly, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is about to give birth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to keep her head still, and then she should be made to spit out the child, and her hands should be held to her mouth and nose; and if she chokes because of this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If that does not work, I can try to pry open the mouth with a toothpick or spoon, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the pregnant woman, such as mint, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, should be boiled in water or steeped in water on the fire; then put one end in a cup or toothpick from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the woman, and hold it until the vapors come up inside the woman; then make her spit out, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If salt water is used.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If it remains after this treatment, and is not cured, instruct the patient to soak his left hand in oil of sage or musk that has been left out in the air, then wrap it up, and then re-examine it; and when you find it, if you grip it and stretch it little by little correctly, so that the joints do not creak during extraction, but move it slightly to the right and left, and then twist; then it will come off and dislocate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the patient's jaw is jammed, we have already spoken of the treatment for dislocation and the fumigation of herbs; and if it is only these that you have said, be careful not to mess up during extraction; but it is necessary that he who is at the jaw of the patient lies on his back in a woman's lap, then she clisters him with four-part oil; if she will and will let go, and will recover, but nevertheless, when she does so, if a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and bleeds the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If one then needs to use smoke treatments that are appropriate for this: no one of the ancients has tried the smoke treatment with watercress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument to be used to smoke the woman during the retention of the first and second flowers, is this one:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like the shape of a dog, and one sets the head carefully in position, and the shoulders wide above the fire; and let the smoke be over the coals, and the tan until it is spent, and start another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce through the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who have not yet had the foundation pierced, but a subtle surgeon should pierce it for him; and if one then needs to bathe so that he pierces it with his thumb, and does not touch it with any sharp object, and wraps it in a wet cloth made with wine and oil, and treats it with ointment until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return, then put a lever under the buttock, and leave his hands free, and be ostenated when he goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no risk of sudden shock from a wound or abscess; if the former needs to be covered: if it needs to be treated, as we have said above, with the lever.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are difficult to treat and grow larger than those that come from other places; and when the former is old, if it is opened, and then moistened with a slightly warm or sharp blade, these fistulas never stop; and they are caused by what comes out of the body or wind therefrom when the sick person has wind, and sometimes in salt water.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if they pierce to the bladder, and just to half of the penis; and they reach up to the intersection of the scrotum, and just above the navel of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so you must know where the fistula passes to the foundation, and not where it passes: and that is that you stick your little finger or foundation, and stick a fine needle of brass or iron in the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, if you stick a small piece of string or hair of a horse as far as you can feel the string or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there is no perforation, wind, or sight, as we have said: know that it does not pierce; otherwise, hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula passes just to the bladder or just to the conduit of urine, if urine comes out, and cannot be controlled by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced just up to the joint of the uterus, so the effort comes up just up to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the invention of the painful inner part, then it is because he has bent it already, and there is no medicine or sudden relief by touching; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except work, and the vain dreams of the foolish people who get mixed up with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of health by fire, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he lowers his legs up to his hips, and his hips are bent towards his belly; then pour a bucket of water, or a plunger if there is tortuosity, until you know where the effort comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain in the foot, then he should insert his middle finger; at that moment he will feel that the nail is penetrating; and if you can feel between your thumb and the finger, then know that it is persistent; otherwise, it does not work because it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	If the patient feels pain in the foot, then he should insert his middle finger; at that moment he will feel that the nail is penetrating; and if you can feel between your thumb and the finger, then know that it is persistent; otherwise, it does not work because it cannot be healed. To successfully treat some of these, however, you must first heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as mentioned above; and pour it directly into the fistula until it stops hurting; do this twice or three times, until you feel that the made chars are burned, which look like a bird's feather; then the cure of moist ointment, while the char comes off, and then bind it with a bandage.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is healthy, then that is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is not healthy, then that cannot be good; and if he tries to pull it out, and does not pierce it all the way up to the base which is at the foundation, and there is a thick covering of cloth or drug between his two hands; and you see the fistula at that place where the covering has been pulled apart; if the cloth of the obstruction of the fistula is pulled together again before the covering, and then cauterized afterwards, as long as it comes to the top of the covering; and the covering will be removed, and he will heal; then put away those cloth covers that look like an owl's feather, and there should be none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not stop bleeding, and a cloth is put between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal herb.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Car the fire cauterizes two bone things: that is to say, the burning of these joints and the searing of blood and the drying up of moisture; then he shall treat the wet tents with a mix of milk or cheese curds, as long as the bones are hot, and then burn the joints in the mixture; then cure the wound with dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is restored, if it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes up to the very foundation of it, and is distant from the body, then cut off that part, and patch it up.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent, and there are two fabrics or joints or characters, or it is ready to pierce, then there is neither promise nor hope but by one of the three ways that we have said: either cauterize it as we have described, or cut off until the end, or if you can, place tents over it and cure it as we have said first; and do not go too deep, lest you cover the foundation, and let the excretion come out by the will of God; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed; or you shall remove that covering and clean it up after it has been cut off from the end, or with a tent or another instrument pointed; then put on the dried medicine which is in the wound, as far as you can; then study to restore the wound, and hold back the fistula in the part beyond the foundation: so will it be lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times of the tubercle according to this way: and when you plug the tent in the tubercle, and it is or it costit on the foundation of the leather above, if take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I plug it with a wire in II, and plug the tent at all the wire in the tubercle as long as it is at the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the wire from that is pierced, so that you plug your two at the foundation; and tie the head of the wire, and join the two shoulders together, and extract them one from the other, and leave them a day or two; and do not restrain it again, until the wire has caught those hairs that are between the two, and they chirp; then cure the wound as long as it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce with all your might, unless it is too completely sealed.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to make a wound by cutting if it is completely sealed, and then treat it, as we have said, until he is well.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spikelet that one makes the fistula with is sharp on one side and not on the other; and on the other hand it is not right to cover what one should not cover, as you see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Hemorrhoids have two forms: they can be inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and small or large, and spread a little or a lot, and there is a little or more blood; and those that are outside are dry and tan-colored, and the cure for those who are inside the fundament is this: order the patient to strain himself to go to the chamber, as much as the fundament will allow, and let the fillet out; if you hurry and grasp it with your nails, then cut it off at its roots; and if it does not hold itself by its moisture, take it with a towel, or cotton, or a piece of cloth; and pull it out with your fingers, then cut it off, and powder it with hot powders that are for cauterizing; or cauterize it as we have said in the chapter of cauterization, so that other cures will not help it until it is well; and if the fundament cannot come out, then clisterize the patient with a hot and harsh clistering, so that it can come out easily; when the patient is clisterized, and the fillet has come out from the fundament, then the cure is easy; and this is how you grasp it with your nails or with pliers, and cut it off, then cure it as we have said, until it is well, and let him avoid being incised with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you prepare the suture according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle; then wind the thread over and under the needle, and pierce the needle from the other side, and bring the two ends of the thread back through the needle, and make them wide; then twist the thread into a form, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do the same with all the others, and leave it to bleed; then put on the foundation a damp cloth soaked in oil or resin, and put it on the foundation, and order the patient to rest; and then leave him until he stops bleeding, and when he has stopped, treat him with ointment and other treatment until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	to dry up at the end or base
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is drying up of the bowels in the intestine, and by nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is no good.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you resect the escrotum above the testicle, which does not allow it to be moistened; then treat it until it is firm as it should be; and if it cannot be made firm, begin to shave more vigorously than before, until it heals, and is scalded; then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	he vomited
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	It is a small appearance of decay before the chest, and it rot completely; and there is no need to cut it, and one can feel it like death vomits, and it comes in all the body, and more in the hands than in any other part.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a feather from an goose, or a strong vulture's feather, and put that feather on the vomit until it turns purple all around; then turn your hand to all the feather as much as you can grasp all around the vomit, and make it firm, and scrape the vomit from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this of a dog's or horse's tooth according to this form, and be careful not to cut too deep and not to run over it.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not let it pierce too deeply, for there is danger of causing pain and injury; cut with caution, and if you see, cauterize the wound as described in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	according to the form of the clister
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Do not make the clister out of silver or brass, or molten gold, nor out of small or great tools, according to the reason for which they are used.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are therefore small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clister, small and great, is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I have a hole or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chies are inside; and at one of the sides II holes are pierced, and in the other; and the belly is placed with a bladder of cow's milk or parchment, and pierced all around the small holes, and there is an interval of space between each hole, then pour into these holes a strong thread made of wool twisted together, and assemble the belly as if it were a cheese; and when the medicine is inside, let it rest against the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cauterize; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and grease the scalp with oil or linseed oil or something similar, then pour it lightly; then the minister spreads the medicine on his two hands until it is fully spread, then removes the clistere, and raises the patient's legs to the wall, and lets the medicine flow out, as much as it can; and if he sleeps a whole night, then that is greater help.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, so is the clitoris also very small like a child; and this is the form of the small clitoris under which the skin is drawn tight.
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the section on dislocation; now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicines according to their condition.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are different according to what they are, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are due to a stone's hit, a spear or a knife or an axe or a lance or a sledgehammer or similar objects; or they are due to the places of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory [will come] in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a movement of stone or of similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large, and you doubt whether it is hot: if you do this soon, a healing will come to the head itself, if it is only blood from the wound, and let it heal in the opposite way from the part that was wounded; and take away the patient's eating of wine and fatty meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not heal, and its meat is made weak, and it does not drink wine, nor eat cheese; and put on the wound, if it is hot, wet with oil and anointment, or with wine that stings; and if it is not hot, put on it, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, that I will speak a little later; and if he has moved it, put on some onions, until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as of a sword-tassel and similar, and the lips do not join by tensing, but are joined by sewing, as I will say to the wounds of the belly, from the stitch.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And if the wound is exposed to the bone and is small, and only holds for a little while, then cover it with skin; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of leather, and command the patient to eat large meats, such as roasted meat and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find leather putrefaction, and it does not go down to the bone, then cover it completely and throw it away; then cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be sealed with medicine, then cut the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light; and that you put this powder in so that fire moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of this powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coal three parts, and the powder finely, and apply to the wound, and bind it firmly, until it has healed well and joined together all its blood; and then bind it tightly, and leave it undisturbed, unless it swells, for we do not stop the medicine as long as it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do we make this powder of coal alone, except when we have incense and dragon's blood, but that fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fire has moved the wound, certainly it is wet, so put on this powder not at all; but put on some oil digested, or eggs of wheat flour made with water and honey, until it dries up; then heal it with other treatments until it is healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers; and I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes from the back of the neck and is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the neck where the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is on the back, then there is no other remedy than to let it heal, and not put anything restraining on it, for this hurts the healing and makes it retreat; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the back is cold, and its connection with the skull, which is the highest bone; but be it sweet wine, as hot as possible, and mixed with oil of roses, and wash with water as well, and other stones of mineral according to this method, and moisten with oil.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then the bandage is tight and sore, then treat until he is well.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he is sore and full of bowels, then cut or lower down; and if the artery is cut, and blood comes from it, so that he becomes dull and weak, and the cauterization has its work; and if the spitting in the throat is cut, or the tongue, and the conduct is preserved, because the meat goes well, if the taste on the chin of the throat is cut, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural shape; and then he is brought forward, and left for some days, then he is treated with ointments that are thrown away until he is well; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, then carry them out all hard, and those you cannot carry out, leave until the wound festers and the issue is forced; and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I said in my chapter on the plaster.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the lance or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a lance or sword wound, and the wound is deep, then look to the wound to see if the wind has escaped the patient's body: because then the wound is deadly; and if it is not deep and is fresh all over the body, then put the powder on it at first, and do not tie it up so that it does not burst open, and let the patient lie down; but put ointment on it attractively, and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put raw wool in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient lie down on the wound for three days, or three or more; then there will be no spasm, or bad convulsions from the heart's movements, or stranger things; and when you see the good signs, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the boils and other sores as long as they are healthy; and if they cannot heal, then cut open the area so that there is no more fistula, and treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	If the wound is from a sword or knife and it is deep, or has gone through the flesh, and if it is small, powder it, and if it has reached the bone, and has broken it into pieces, then cut the wound, and the strong ones will be tied; and if they are not tied, let them fester, so that the extractions may take place; and for other wounds on other limbs, there is a judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement dou ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the belly is great and small, and there is a great wound when the intestines break out, or when the intestines are torn from their place, which makes an opening for the wind; and the stitch is more painful, and there is no difference between the small and the great wound, because one does not put back the intestines as they come, else they will swell up so that they feel cold, and then put them back; and for the other wounds of the body and other limbs, there are three ways: the common stitches are made in the belly stitch and in the stitches of the other wounds of the body, and the private stitches are unique to the private wounds; and yet, all of these stitches are more private with the belly stitch, and I will tell each one apart and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestine has come out, and there is something to be done, this is done in one of two ways: either because the wound is small, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen with cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is hot, warm it in the third way: moisten a sponge or I mol drapeil in lukewarm water only, or you cook in lukewarm squash and cypress and spike, and strain the intestine as much as the swelling comes out; and never do this with restraint, and let it rest that it may cool down.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling go away, if you moisten the intestine with water or warm it, and marjoram is cooked, because by this the entrance is closed to a small thing; and if it cannot enter, if you make a small cut in the wound with the instrument where you cut the hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to let it rest, that we do not cut it unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument for splitting: if you cut inside the curve and turn it away, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the entrails are thrown out, if you can put it back in its natural place in its own proper place, for that is a mighty thing to do.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is right that you should make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then raise the head and the chest higher than the lower parts; and so it is right to treat what I have said about large wounds and painful ones.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, you should dress the patient, then put your hands between them, and with a wet cloth rub the whole hole from one end to the other; and so it is common to sew with needles, and it is that you should take a strong thread or more, according to the size of the wound, then leave a little space at the head of the wound, and stick a needle in it both ways, and make two stitches together, and put the needle through from one side to the other, leaving a little space between each stitch; this is how you should sew a small wound. But when sewing a large wound, you should take needles and threads according to the size of the wound, and pierce the skin with the needle on both sides, and make stitches together, and then put the needle through from one side to the other, leaving less space between each stitch; this is how you should sew a large wound. This way of sewing is most convenient for small wounds, because it takes fewer needles and threads than a single stitch; and it is that you should take two stitches together with a double thread, and pierce both ends of the skin together with one needle, leaving less space between each stitch; this is how you should sew when there are several wounds close together, in the same way as you would sew a sheet. And here is another way of sewing large wounds: take needles and strong threads according to the size of the wound, and pierce the skin with a needle on both sides, and make two stitches together, and then put the needle through from one side to the other; this is how you should sew when the wound is wide. And here is another way of sewing large wounds: take needles and strong threads according to the size of the wound, and pierce the skin with a needle on both sides, and make two stitches together, and then put the needle through from one side to the other; this is how you should sew when the wound is wide. This method of sewing is most suitable for large wounds, because it takes fewer needles and threads than single stitching; and it is that you should take two stitches together with a double thread, and pierce both ends of the skin together with one needle, leaving less space between each stitch; this is how you should sew when there are several wounds close together, in the same way as you would sew a sheet. And here is another way of sewing large wounds: take needles and strong threads according to the size of the wound, and pierce the skin with a needle on both sides, and make two stitches together, and then put the needle through from one side to the other; this is how you should sew when the wound is deep. And here is another way of sewing large wounds: take needles and strong threads according to the size of the wound, and pierce the skin with a needle on both sides, and make two stitches together, and then put the needle through from one side to the other; this is how you should sew when the wound is deep. This method of sewing is most suitable for deep wounds, because it takes fewer needles and threads than single stitching; and it is that you should take two stitches together with a double thread, and pierce both ends of the skin together with one needle, leaving less space between each stitch; this is how you should sew when there are several wounds close together, in the same way as you would sew a sheet. And here is another way of sewing large wounds: take needles and strong threads according to the size of the wound, and pierce the skin with a needle on both sides, and make two stitches together, and then put the needle through from one side to the other; this is how you should sew when there are several wounds close together.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought him the intestine, then he was eight and twenty hours old, and the wound was sewed up to fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where we could not get it, nor any medicine; and I put cotton wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle and pull it from the outside in up to where it goes; when it has pierced the right way, so that the thread comes out on the opposite side, and the thread is tied; this is how this type of sewing is done, so that you sew just as a furrier does when he sews pelts together, and you leave one side of the cloth uncovered while you tie the other side, until the sewing is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way to sew, which Galien describes properly, is if it is like any well-known font that joins the two parts together naturally, and applies one of the heads of the needle to the other head, in this manner: take a needle or the hair from near the tip, and pierce that hole below, and leave the two heads joined; then turn the needle, and pierce it from the outside part all the way to the inside, between the two heads; then pierce both of them from the outside part all the way to the inside, in two other hairs that are on the other side; and this is the most common and proper way to sew.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galien says this word, and no one contradicts him, that you should sew the belly with two needles or threads; and you must drive one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew clothes; and know that when the break is in the middle of the belly, the sewing is stronger than at any other place of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l'ait muee, si remet arer l'intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l'ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu'il soit sanez; et se tu n'as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu'ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k'il soit sanez.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you do not need another medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the main members, then you should moisten it with light oil of tempere heat, or with rose oil, and put it between the breasts, and wash the armpits; and if pain or pus appears in the balls, and often happens, if the black wine is washed, and more often if the pus comes up to the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is newly born, and this is because of the opening of veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and because its nature is close to that of children.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the skin tears from the wound, put it back in place as well as the intestine does while it is fresh; and if it is old and turning yellow or black, you must find the spot that is black, because there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the two bones, and hang them up on the edge of the wound from behind so that the extraction can take place when the skin tears, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	from a rupture in the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, you can restore it in some places, for I saw that one that was newly born or had been pierced by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became swollen and turned into a fistula, and there was vomiting and wind; I applied a cure according to what I could, and I did not stop being subtle until it was healed, and I sewed up the openings.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him mend his wound, I doubted that the patient had done himself ill in his belly; and there was no evil, but delayed in better dispositions, and eating and drinking; and said neither of any experimenters that when he has a small wound in the intestine, that it must be tied in some way: take threads from great testicles, then gather the lips of the wound together, and when the thread had opened the mouth, if she puts it on her II lips, so that she extrudes her mouth up; and then he covers his head, and stays like this that he cannot untie, then takes another thread after in the same way as before, until the whole wound is taken; and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If it burns in the intestine, and does not cause any harm to the patient, and can be tied with a thin thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in some way: take the head of this intestine thread that is very well cleaned, and then tie at the head of this thread one thread of linen that is twisted, then draw the thread through the needle, and then cut the intestine, and turn it back in the hole; and this method of stitching with threads is more effective than according to the route of the fiance and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the small intestine grooves, there is no remedy or medicine except subtility.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula, where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	I know that any wound or abscess, when healing, is called a "fistula" in its entirety, and most importantly when it has been cut with a knife.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	I know that any wound or abscess, when healing, is called a  "fistula" in its entirety, and most importantly when it has been cut with a knife. A fistula is, according to the theory of the four humors, a severe and pale green color, where there is no pain, and it is also like the feather of an eagle; and it never breaks clearly, and sometimes cracks heavily; it never leaks, and sometimes does so lightly; and I have already discussed in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed, and there is no healing, this cannot happen except by one of the eight causes: namely, the smallness of the blood vessel or corset; or its malice; or because it has a hard matter inside, and on the lips, which does not allow a vessel to form; or too much bowe; or the leach is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for healing; or because it is due to a pestilential malady; or because digestion and health are late in that region, and nature escapes by design; or there are veins or bones: and I have already described all these causes, signs, and cures with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or covient that I make you aware of the cure for fistula, which is done by hand work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistula may occur in all members of the body; for it comes from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the syph, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it has reached that part which belongs to the principal member, and similar parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas that are of this manner are of great difficulty in treatment, and there is only work and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not reach to the part that I have mentioned, and you have promised to cure it, and you have discovered it, then take an iron or brass probe, if the fistula is straight, feel it out; and if the fistula is bent, feel it out with a thin probe, for the probe bends in accordance with the curvature of the fistula; and if the fistula has broken open at both ends, because it moistens so much from one break to another, and cleanses itself; then feel it carefully with your power, that you may know whether there is bone or nerve, and it is completely healed, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you have truly known the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or in any of the places that I have mentioned, then heal it according to what I have said, and take out the wrong and corrupted bones that are inside; and then cure it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from one right side, then you must feel for it carefully, so that you can find the place where it is; and if you cannot find it with your fingers, then put wet medicine on a probe, and bottle it to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrupts the excess that has been reserved at the bottom; and then put ointments in thin rags that are clean, as long as it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it, as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then take it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or an artery is cut in the neck, if the blood becomes black and putrid, then treat it with dry things until it heals, and if it does not heal, wrap it up as before, knowing that you have not yet finished: if you uncover and examine it until you are at the bottom, then remove all the pus, and restore the place; and if it is healed there, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too complete so you cannot go there; if there is no other way than to let it heal naturally; and if there is one small corrupted bone, and you can pull it out with pliers, if you extract it with a suitable instrument for that, and if there are many bones, then pull them all out, and if the moisture causes you discomfort, and there is no mistake or fear, then cut and moisten it, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	Et si tu ne les peux ôter à une heure, si mets sur la plaie chose enjanrant pourriture, et laisse tant que les leus soit pourris entre les os, et adonc si avront plus légierement les os; et si c'est un grand os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que le noiror soit toute osté, puis restaure la plaie; et s'il en a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc'à moule de l'os; si le convient soier et coper tout jusc'à la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu'il soit soudé; et je te dirai d'une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i prènes exemple et aide en ton oeuvre.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	If you cannot remove them within an hour, put something that causes rot on the wound, and leave it until the bones are rotten between them, and then the bones will come out more easily; and if it is a large bone, like a leg or thigh, if you wait long enough for the corruption until all the bone is black, then restore the wound; and if a great deal of it has been corrupted, and it has come down to the end of the bone, if it is covered with flesh all the way to the corruption, then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to a young man in his leg, so that you can take example and help in your work.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these crevices and then searched all the crevices, and I found that one came against the other on all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly set up a tent in one of these crevices and then searched all the crevices; I found that one came against the other on all parts of the leg. So I began, and dug into one of the crevices until I found some bone, and I found it corroded and decayed, and the corruption extended to the bone inside; I recognized what appeared to be bone corrosion, and I made sure there was none elsewhere, unless that which I had just seen; then I started healing the wound with medicines over a long period of time, but I couldn't bind it together. Then I began again, and found the bone just as before, and found that the corruption continued in the bone, and recognized it, and then dug it out, and leaned over to bind the hole; but I could not dig more than a palm's length into the bone, and then wrapped it up tightly with medicines; and it healed and was bound firmly, and I did not need to restart the healing process except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car for the evacuation of blood there was often, but he was cured entirely, and gave birth to the bone in place of the bone a hard shell, and was of good disposition and had no harm or contrary from all over, nor did it hurt him to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the spine, so it should be done in this way: take a thread, and stretch it to the head of the bone that has opened, and order no one that he does not extend it upward; and put another thread, thicker than the first, on the thread, and tie it to the shell that is over the bone, and pull the head so that you remove the corrupted shell, and uncover the shell on the place where you see and feel the corruption, and do so again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the jaw is rotten and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover the whole skull; then place a hot brand on it, and then sew the corruption from one part to another, and let the thread hang down from the long side of the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the rotten joint, and sew the bone where it is joined from the other side; and if the corruption is in the extension of the two joints, then there is no other pain but that of covering; and if the corruption is at the grip of the hand or foot, then it is very painful; but nonetheless you must inquire about that corruption to see how it opens; and purify it in all ways that you can, except that the vein or nerve makes you contrary; and know that the chisel and the threads for sewing these bones are many, according to the appearance of the bones and their size and subtlety and greatness and smallness and hardness; and because of this it is appropriate to prepare each instrument for every appearance of work, and know that the work will show you the instrument that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; therefore suppose the instrument that you need according to what suits it.
dou feu	to fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	Dou fire: to fire; and if you have medicine, that corruption by the cure of medicines, and it is not helpful, then cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes, so that the patient escapes from this death or from badness, which is greater, from the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members turn black, so that they seem to be burned by fire, and after that corruption moves from one member to another, and takes hold throughout the body; if you hurry to cover it up, and if it's because of the percussion of certain poisonous beasts, such as scorpions of the sea and Adders and others like them, then the corrosion is at the head of the two, so cover it up, and don't give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes only to the hand, then cover the joint, so that the corruption does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cover at the shoulder, and if it goes beyond the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy except the quantity of its virtue; and all this do when the corruption appears or feels: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it comes or feels below the leg, then there is only one thing left but to let the sick person die; and the way of covering or sewing up the member is that you tie it over and over, and extend a minister each end of a string, and another minister the other end of the thread, and take off the cloth that is between the two strings, as much as the bone is uncovered; then cover or sew, and put a piece of linen on each side, so that the linen does not touch the healthy place, and comes to the patient another wound and an abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restrainans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No one time comes abscess in the dry flesh, and delays so long that it forms a large swelling; and then ruptures and leaks, and bursts open, and lasts as long as our serfs; and the skin which is above is also thin like fine cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are sure that the skin is getting worse, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption. If you have a suspicion that the skin is getting worse, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thick as cloth, and does not run to the bone or the nerve, and such disease is called "healthy", and is not called "fistula"; but if it is so enlarged that it comes to the bone completely, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin so that you can crush all the skin together, and most especially when it is thin like fine cloth; and does not run out because of its corruption.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the bowels are in perfect health, if you do not allow them to be disturbed as they should; and if you cannot cover the navel with a cloth as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the bowels run down to the lowest point that they can reach, for when the bowels are in perfect health, they should not be disturbed, and if you cannot cover the navel with a cloth as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way: let the bowels run lightly downwards, leaving nothing of the bowels behind; and take medicines that strengthen the belly, placed over the drape of linen that covers the entire belly; then cover the forces at the place where the navel is a little larger than the first, for ointing should be applied to another drape according to the quantity of the navel, and it should be placed on the navel in order to support the bowels, and do not take off the large drape until after many days once; and he who is on the navel, often takes off in order to remove the bowels, and knows what runs from the bowels, whether it is poison or pus or enough or digested or undigested; and take care that the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and how long the medicine has been extended, and you see the nature that rises on the navel, then know that the breasts are already hard, and approach them. And then let him lie down in the morning, or the third day, and when you dress the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become swollen and distended after many days, knowing that the breasts do not grow.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons come slowly after a long time, if you do not despair of health, for health draws near.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some people whose late healing of wounds and such makes their breasts swell slowly after many days, knowing that the breasts do not grow; and if the breasts lag behind in getting better, and become hard, then take a great deal of the medicine as described above; but if you want to use it with oil, and roast it with wine, and reduce it to powder; then put it on honey when it comes out of the fire; then bind it to the breast, and never give it in a paste, or make a paste out of roots from heaven, which is also like flour of times and hundredfold; and use simple things or compounds: grind them, and put them on honey as I said, and use them; and if the cure lasts long, and is not cured by this remedy, then know that corruption is complete, and causes a pressure in the bone, or in hard limbs, or in joints; so that the cure of fistulas, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the nail of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	is a pimple that grows out of the nail bed of the hand, or foot, or perhaps in another two; and when it is broken, and one does not take care, then it comes to be an ulcer, and burns and hurts so much that it corrosts the root of the nail, and perhaps corros all; and comes to the corruption to the bone, so much that it brings a pungent pain, and is the two large nails, and is the color rust.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not profit, then you must cut off all the surplus that is reserved of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail presses the flesh and begins to ache, and bleeds, then you must cut off the nail that points the pain, and put it on top, and carefully chop off the tip of the nail with a sharp knife, and put medicine on the remaining part that burns and corrodes in order to destroy it all; then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corrosion est dans l'os, alors le coupe, et trai le avec force, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois que la corruption s'étend, alors applique le remède décrit ci-dessus jusqu'à ce qu'il guérit ; et s'il est blessé et enflé, et sent une grande douleur, alors il convient de le guérir en premier ; puis coupe l'ongle avec un ciseau pris sur le spatumile (une sorte d'os long du pied) en coupant travers l'ongle, et soigne que la coupe ne atteigne pas la base de l'ongle, car le patient ressentrait une douleur terrible ; et s'il y a un problème, applique quelque chose qui apaise.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	la douleur du syndrome du tunnel carpien de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	La douleur du tunnel carpien de la main peut être causée par un os ou une gaine tendineuse qui se développent anormalement, entraînant une compression ou une inflammation des nerfs sensibles dans le poignet. Les symptômes peuvent inclure une douleur et une engourdissement dans la région du poignet et parfois jusqu'aux mains.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se mute, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se mute; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d'un large spatumile.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Whoever is born between the two knees does not move, and whoever is born at the junction of the two knees may move; the size of that which is chubby is so light, in some way: cut it from its root with a wide chisel.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In whoever is born between the two knees, if you must first cut the hair roundly up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable thread, and then heal it until it is well.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together by birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by the burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cut the joint that is joined together, so that it repairs according to its natural forms; then place between two canvases or drapes soaked in oil and rosin so that it does not join; or place between two pieces of thin felt until its joins are healed, as is fitting.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Se soudemens comes to any of his two with the palm, so hold it fast as is fit.
des vils	of
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	are evil, large, wrapped in layers of melancholy, that come with many members of the body; and more come in the legs of those who walk and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So therefore you should not administer any purgative at all, and then heal it from the basis.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The cure of iron is to be performed according to two methods: one is that you cut them open, and drain the black blood; and the other method is that you leave the vein intact, and drain all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The size of the incision is according to this manner: rise up the first leg with hot water very well, until the big blood is slightly thin, and then extract the leg of the sick from above the thigh to the knee; then cut the vein open in one place, or two, or three, with a large size of incision, and then drain and drain all the black blood in your hand, from one head to another, until so much blood comes out that the sick can bear it; and then tie it up, and command him to color his flesh with black blood; and begin again the evacuation and healing when the veins are empty, and not hurt the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is contracted and twisted and wrapped up together, and it does not stand straight, as we have said, it is necessary that you break it in a crooked way, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the shape of the iron whereon one covers the vis if it is curved, and does not cut it, so that it covers the vein; and it is a large curve, because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is located in the legs, in warm parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in the ground where there is no moisture; and perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this causes a pus that comes from the skin, as if it were coming from inside the body, crawling between the skin and the flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the onset of this disease are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then the joints change, and the wound begins to pus, just as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the signs of the onset of this disease are that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then change the joints, and let the wound pus, just as the root of a plant. When you open the head, if it is necessary that you wrap a piece of cloth around it from one-and-a-half palm to two palms, and tie it, and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time that there is any point missing, if the cloth is too long, cut off a part, and wrap the rest, and do not cover it over again at its root, until it is all gone; because if you do cover it, it enters into the char, and causes abscess and putridity or other illness; therefore this disease should be treated little by little up to the chief, and there should remain nothing of it except the skin; and never should this wound pus when it is treated from five palms to ten, and I have seen it come to me in six palms, and when you cover it, if it rises or sinks, and pierces all the way down, so that everything inside is destroyed; and bring medicines to the place by day, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never touch this vein with your hands, and least of all when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot is, for it often leaks, and then it rains; so then you must treat it as we have said above.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The worms that are born between leather and hide
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff disease" because it often affects buffaloes, and it is a small worm that is born between leather and hide, and goes up and down all over the body, feeling warm as it moves from member to member, until it comes out at the skin, and goes away; and it is infected with pus of some humors, as if it came in worms and snakes and beetles and parasites; and one might doubt its malice, because when it enters the body, and it goes up to the head, and it comes to the oil, it might enter again, and destroy the oil; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being cured and drawn out, you can only do so when he goes: then it is necessary that you place the head above and away from a strong string tightly bound; then put on top and draw it out firmly, and let the head be completely immersed in the bed, and if you don't find it, burn it with fire, as much as it dies; and the greatest damage it does is that it ruins the oil, as we have said; and if you see its chief coming near the oil, then hold it away from its socket completely, then put on top and draw it out firmly; and it is necessary to use the patient of the change of clothing of medicines soluble for bad humors putrid, and if it is warm with meat putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and moves from member to member; and I have seen this one that I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to treat a sick woman, and I uncovered her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; and then after, I saw it rise up as fast as anything, as a worm rises up from its hole, as quicksilver rises from its place; the pain departed from that place, and lodged in her shoulder, and then a little after corrupted throughout her whole body, until she came to the other arm; and then she told me that she twisted herself around the body, just as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled how she moved her member to another member, for I had never seen this disease move in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Nevertheless, I had heard of many who had had pain move from one member to another, but I had never seen it myself in this way with the woman; and I thought that perhaps she had a constricted chest, and her veins uncovered, and because of that windiness, and not because of what is called pleurisy, and because her members were moist.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, up to lie down and get better soon, then let him rest; cauterize the wound; and if you don't see blood, let him take pills that stop the wind, such as foul pills, and serapin pills, and similar ones.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	are various, according to their appearances and according to the places of their bodies.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	have different shapes, for some have long points, and others are small, and some are curved, and some are soldered; and some have two angles, and some have tongues, and some have pieces; and some bleed in a particular member, like the brain, heart, liver, pancreas, rein, intestine, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she dies in any of these parts of the body, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you wash yourself from this arrow extraction, for death comes after many preparations; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully extracted, pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the sign of death appears in the brain when the arrow pierces the bone and causes a hole on top of the skull, it is when there is a sudden blindness, and dizziness, and confusion, and pain in the ears, and a change in taste, and spasms, and confusion of thought, and vomiting of phlegm; and perhaps it enters without causing a sore, or the ears, or perhaps it loses its speech and voice; and also when the wound seems moist with white pus, and looks like burning charcoal; and if this sign appears to you, then you should take care of yourself and extract the arrow, if it is still there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the wound when it itches or stings is that it is near the left breast, and also feels as if it were stuck to something hard, not empty; and perhaps the wound itself will move as feathers do, with a dark red color, and coldness and sweat come, and then faintness: so you should know that death draws near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that has lodged is that there is no pain, but foam suddenly springs from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's color changes, and he gasps for breath and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow has lodged in the back, it will hurt the small ribs; and it will make a great noise and pain and gasp for breath; and all the limbs will move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow has lodged in the belly, perhaps there will be nothing but waste from the meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow enters the abdomen, and there is no end to it through the intestine's route, then there is no hope in its treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow enters the bladder, and urine comes out and flows away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if as it is in the case with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the ajutoire and the spine and the forcele and the cuixe and the legs, and the limb's appearance, are safe according to many provisions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the loin's nerve or artery, and it does not become venous, so as I will tell you that it happened to me, do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to him at home that an arrow entered his neck near the root of the nose: I tried it, and I drew it from another side away from the fat of the ear, and was cured with great pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And throwing an arrow that struck the fat of oil paper on, and the arrow was re-embedded, and I could not achieve anything except the tip towards the wood, and it was the arrow large with a Turkish arc, to all I felt light without ears; The game was clean, and no bad accidents came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And throwing an arrow into the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears; I knew the beards, and I avoided as much as I could throw it, and the Christians were clean.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And throwing an arrow at a home, which was the neck or belly, and I thought he was dying; and then it passed thirty days, so his disposition did not change; I cut on the arrow, and engaged it, and threw it, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you want to go to a home where there is an arrow in the chest or back, and it is seared on top; and hold the arrow inside, and do not change its natural dispositions, nor find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I saw another man, to whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and it was seared; and he held it so that he suffered great pain; and many others.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I healed a prince's son, to whom an arrow had lodged in his neck, and it was piercing; it was slightly deviating on the right side; and the arrow was all embedded. I was called to heal after it had been stuck for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I asked it for a long time, and I did not feel it; but he felt tickling and pain on his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was the point of the arrow; I put on the spot with plaster that is both restorative and digestive, so that the blood does not swell; and I saw the spot of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for three days, and resolved the wound very quickly, and delayed it so that the patient felt the arrow inside him for a long time, until he could feel it with his finger; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the corrosive medicine for three days, until it was opened, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened at the spot; then I applied the corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound, until the head of the arrow became visible; and after four months had passed, and then the wound broke out so much that I pulled out the nails on both sides, and could not get it out; therefore I did not stop from making subtle and ingenious ways with instruments, until I got one made well, according to the shape which came at the end of this chapter, until I tried it, and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored; but when I restored it, the wound was sewed up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Now you have said the quality of extraction of certain arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, for the book cannot take all; but the master surgeons compare well on a very small thing, and on those who are present and failing, try nine or ten operation, and nine or ten instrument, to the dismemberment of foreign things which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows should not be in the members or they are stuck except according to two ways: either at the place where they enter, or at another part; and that which is out of place, is a sticking arrow in the flesh, and should never be now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	Et s'elle ne sault maintenant, si la laisse tant que les chardes soient pourries entre, et soye aliee la sortie; et ausi s'elle est fiche en l'os, et elle ne peut sortir, si la laisse ainsi aucun jours, et la muef chescun jour; et adonques elle sault, et s'elle ne sault, si perce entre a tout I foret subtil, tant que les leus entre soient eslargies, et puis la trai.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is lodged in the bone of the head, and goes to one of the cheeks of the skull, and some of the accidents that I have said are open to the patient: do not pull it out, but leave it for a while until it is even after a few days, because if the arrow comes to the eye, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not lodged far in the bone, and does not come out whole, and the patient remains for some days without a bad accident, then the device of extraction should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very deeply lodged and cannot be extracted, then administer hot tar as I told you; then treat the wound as long as it remains healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged very deeply and cannot be seen, and you do not want to take a chance on taking it out completely; and if you feel it, take it out with a suitable instrument; and if you are unable because of the depth of the injury, or the arrow's thickness, or the nerves and blood vessels involved, cut the arrow as far as possible, then pull it out; and be very careful not to break the arrow while pulling it out, so that you pull it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, then take it to the foreskin, because extraction is difficult.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the pain of extraction causes you to be opposed, then administer what we have said in our chapter on the medicine; and beware of incising the nerve and the vein, and do not pull the arrow out quickly or slowly or firmly or loudly; and put the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow entered, for this is the greatest aid there is, and if you cannot do that, then follow what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or which does not open anything of its own, or whose skin is swollen in a certain place, so that it can be seen or felt differently: then cut above, as far as the tweezers can take it, and then extract it: do not wait now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, so twist your hand round, as long as it enters into the bone, and expand the bone, then draw it back.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot be drawn out, so leave it still, and then begin the extraction again as long as it is still; and if there is an arrow in it, so squeeze it at the end; and if there is a splinter, and you see pain, administer ointment, if you administer a tool with a sharp point, so that the point of the splinter enters into the hole of the instrument; and then push out, and if the splinter is taken out, so squeeze the instrument at the point entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if there is an arrow stuck in, so cut away all the tissue around where it comes out, if you can, then heal the wound as it seems fit.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow enters the chest or the belly or the bladder or the side, and it is nearby, then you can cover it with a cloth if it covers; and beware of covering the vein and the nerve, and then remove it, and then sew up the wound, for this is work; and heal it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs that are used to treat arrows are similar to an owl's beak, and this is how you should do it:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of doing this: large, medium, and small, depending on the amount of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the tongs for holding the arrow's tip is also like the beak of an owl, done as follows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the tongs for handling and catching the arrow:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Veins of the chest common:
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly known are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it runs along the left side of the body, and people call it the 'vein of the head'; its main branch is called the 'fast', and it consists of the cephalic and the basilic, and people call it the 'vein of the wrist'; and the basilic runs from the right to the left side of the body, and people call it the 'vein of the belly', and it is located on top of the fascia, and it is that which we feel when we touch it clearly on the hand.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The vein that is located between the thumb and the index finger, and if it has two branches; and there are three veins in each leg: one runs along the inner side of the hand from the little finger to the wrist, and the second runs from the ankle on the outside of the leg up to the knee, and the third runs from the ankle on the inside of the leg up to the knee; and there are three veins in the other leg as well.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Here is the translation of the text line by line: 
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Here is the translation of the text line by line: 
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The medical treatise begins by discussing the importance of treating injuries to the brain and face, which can lead to headaches, migraines, and vision problems. It highlights the need for carefully extracting foreign objects from these areas, such as arrows or splinters, using a tool called a "fosseur." The text then describes the technique of rotating the patient's neck to remove any objects without causing further harm.
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	The text continues with instructions for extracting objects from the neck: "Place the point of the tool on the vein, and hold it securely with your hand or another object... Let the blood flow gradually according to the amount you observe... Then loosen the patient's collar and secure the vein until it is stable and there is no more bleeding.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is necessary that the flame be very hot; and the vein is cut across, because the bone is nearby, and by chance the flame breaks when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The patient should let the hair grow long and even on the shoulders, and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they are fully grown. 
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it catches fire, it is subtle, so break it; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if it catches fire, it is subtle, so break it; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	And if it catches fire, it is subtle, so break it; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then tie it on cotton, and tie it well.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of cattle
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the good of the health of cattle, if they assist in milking by hand in the mouth, and with corruption of the gums, and tears of the lips, and swelling and pain of teats, and entor.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the health is such that it sits before you with its neck held back as I have said; then return the lip and look at the veins, one on each side of the mouth, which are black, and by which they are swollen: so take one of each, and all in this way of the two veins that are above and below, because it is a middle way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the health of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	For the health of the tongue, after the health of the head, and that is to the stretching of the throat, and to the diseases of the eye, and to the diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the health-seeker is such that the patient chokes between your hands before the sun, and stretches out the tongue, and looks upwards and downwards at a black vein on each side: so stretch one and the other, and do not overstretch them too much, for they are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the chest that are commonly treated have two methods: either by striking hard with a large flail or an olive wood club, which is called "aneiling"; and they are large and thin according to the width and the contraction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the fire flail is so named, and it is wide as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is useful to open the flat veins that contain large blood and turmoil; and this is the shape of the olive wood club.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is thinner pointed, and is to treat the thin veins where there is yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment for a basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases of the throat, neck, chest, and abdomen; and it is appropriate for the healer to treat it thoroughly, and to bind up the artery that is outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he seizes the earth, and a flow of blood comes, if it is necessary to stop it, as I have said; and it must not be seized by fire, but cut off like sheep.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the bazileus does not open clearly, if it is necessary to extract it and change it with another; or you want any rain of his, or you heal in place of him the vein by the arm: it opens clearly; and seize it with fire anesil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you see clearly the place of the wound, so that it is necessary to extract the arm, that you touch the place until you know the pulse; then mark the place of the elbow, and then take the arm, and open the vein with fire anesil; and guard so that you do not injure in the artery when you see the place running, for it is of the artery: therefore avoid.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si tu vois jaillir en haut comme l'urine d'un enfant, et que le sang soit rouge et mince, sache que c'est un signe de veine: hâte-toi donc, et mets ton pouce sur longuement, puis ferme ton pouce tant qu'il est tendu, car il y a souvent du mouvement; souviens-toi de lever le bras, et laisse-le ainsi, et ne fais pas bouger la personne malade; et sois sur tes gardes, et ne fais pas bouger jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood does not stop flowing, and it comes to you, and the medicine is not ready for you, then cut the artery if it is open, because the head of the shoulder is dislocated; and stop the flow of blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a piece of fig tree, and make it, and take one half and put it well together with the other; if it stops bleeding, it is good; if not, use the powder that stops blood, as we have said, in several dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the ability of the arm of the body.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfant, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtilitat, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	The vein is between the two nerves, so cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The head of the cephalic vein should be tied, and the ends of the vein should be cut; and it is necessary to cauterize with fire from an olive or a laurel branch, for this is the safest way to treat a vein, because it does not involve cutting any nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	All the same, it is necessary to desire the lighter life and not grieve for anything if it fails the first time, and one starts over again; and by chance, the weights increase in some men, when it fails the first time, but nothing grieves.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about the doctor, is that medicine should only be practiced to maintain health and prevent future illnesses; and it is done in one of the three veins: namely, the cerebral, the abdominal, and the basal. You must practice medicine at the beginning of a fast, in autumn or winter after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and you must practice medicine on the first day or third day of the week, after two hours or three days of the week.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The doctor who is skilled in the diseases of old age does not have a set schedule but must work every day and at all times; and it is not appropriate for doctors to treat children until they are 12 or 13 years old, nor women who have been pregnant for more than four months until they have recovered.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Do not treat the elderly who are over 60 years old.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	If you are treating someone, in any way, it is necessary to fix the intestines of a light clister if there is a blockage, if it has retained mucus, so that the veins do not draw in the harmful waste that harms the main members; and it is not appropriate to treat those who are too bloated from meat, or drunkards, as long as it lasts, nor ydropics; and it is not appropriate to treat after a colic passion, vomiting, abdominal cramping, excessive childbearing, labor, staying up late, eating, drinking, or taking medicine if there is a chance it will help; then bath or wash, if nothing else helps to relieve the pain, and treat the vein at the navel, as we have said; and protect yourself from that day's work, and from fasting, lust, and similar things; and be moderate and restrained, and let the doctor who is treating you be higher than the one who is treating others, and rub his arms twice or three times, then pull the vein gently, because if it is too tight or too loose, it cannot stand; and then rub the doctor's hands with his left hand for a while, so that the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the doctor's hands with the flame of a small piece of old oil, then put his right hand on that vein where he is going to treat, that the vein does not break and hurt him.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that run like strings to the worker, and if they have such ones that are plain with windiness, so that when one sets them on fire, if one takes away the flame, and cannot open the vein, then it is of those; and if he opens the vein, if it is too narrow, for this one it is necessary that the worker be on his guard concerning these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; but if not, then begin again a little little bit of that place where or on hospital, if the pains are not enlarged.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the pains are enlarged and the patient hopes, let him rest for one day or two, and do not tie his arm: perhaps there will come an abscess; do not enter or bathe, then begin the work again if it pleases you; and if the wound is small, or the cut is thin, and you doubt that it will not hurt as much as you see, then set fire to it all at once correctly; and work a little on hospital, so that the pains are enlarged; for this often happens, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see a vein inflamed, do not recommend the use of salt, and put a little oil on it, for it softens the heart of the blood and is wet in this place the oil that lies; and thus administer the oil to each vein that you treat the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same does three times and blows the air, when it is placed on the vein; but subtlety, it slips when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	If there is a large abscess, which often happens when the opening of the vein is small, then you must hurry and put a wet sponge in water and in silk a little hot, and hold it for an hour; and it is necessary that you do this after the blood comes out of the vein, and if it stays in place for a few days without any black or green color, then it does not harm him; and if you see it, put on any thing of aloe or mirrhe poultice made with juice of calamus, mastich, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance to the injury of the basilica: so put your hand on, and if you find the soft place with the pressure of the hand, that is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid putting anything on it from what we have said, for by chance in the middle of the artery: but make him dry with plaster to harden the place, then heal it with another remedy until he is well.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat every injury according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it is red; and if you see pus, let it stand until it is thin; and if it is too warm, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for those who are ill and need to extract the blood, make the wound larger and let the flames be broad; and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and heal them little by little, and let them not be cut in a straight line, but rather across, otherwise there will be a risk of blood loss and damage to the nerves, and it is better than the healing by cutting long.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose course is in sickness, it is right to give moistened bread in grape juice; if he is heated, he will have a warm drink three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, let him eat before the disease moistened bread in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and beans, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he has a fever during sickness, after the exit of three or four pints of blood, it is right that he hums brewed wine, and fragrant syrup, and uses other things that we have said in the chapter or chaplet of syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up any amount of food and then sickness at another time, it is right that when he is weakened by great sickness, he be healed little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who needs to vent his arms after the first sneeze, and he has a strong course, so that he heals 7 hours after the first sneeze or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who sneezes from another part, if he should sneeze in two days or three.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has a cough from the inner part of his chest, which causes fever; if so, draw out great quantity, and widen the opening as much as it chokes, then reward all the conditions for sneezing, and put your hand on his pulse when he sneezes, that death does not come in place of the choke, and this happens many times, when the sneeze is neglected; and it is not good when you dislodge his arm, and make him sneeze again with fire, and the opening is closed, that you press firmly on it; but if it is bent, let it extend his arm carefully, for that would be bad, but leave it until he sneezes a second time; or you touch it to the tip of the flame, as much as the mucus that is choked from the vein comes out, and put there a little string soaked in water, and press lightly on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, let it be and do not tighten it, as long as the abscess is subsiding.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires that the blood be drained a second time, then let it be done in the same place or in another vein or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that goes into the arm is a second vein for the blood to go into, because it is composed of the vein of the chief.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of the wound is that the patient pours his hand in hot water, until the color is red; then let it move a little, so that the vein appears clearly, then wound now across, not large or long; and let the cuts be wide apart, and wound close to the joint of the hand, and don't pull out, if it's stuck, but let it come out easily; and if it's stuck in the wind, don't put the hand in hot water again, for we put it more into a hurry than into a rest; and the wound of this vein is saved more than all other veins, since there is neither an artery nor a nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The medicine of the right hand saves all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: pull out the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein has gone, if you can see it; and then cut it off, and chop it up into small pieces, without grating it; and do not grind it too finely, for the nerves are all exposed and bare, and then put the hand back in hot water, so that it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot be drawn out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have finished treating the blood as much as is necessary, put oil and silk on it to hold it tightly together, and do this for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The medicine of the left hand saves the disease of the mouse, and do all the same as I have told you above for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The disease of the knee is worth all the illnesses that dislocate the body, such as the illness of the foot, and the stopping of flow, and the disease of the toes, and of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	The quality of this disease is that the patient should dip his foot in warm water and rub it on the leg until it swells, and tie it up at the joint of the foot; and the leg should be wrapped with rags, and more rags should be placed where there is more swelling, or at the ankle, which causes more pain.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the tendons that are dislocated, and treat it with the same treatment as you would a wound, and let the flame burn it.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot take it out, put the foot back in the water, and leave the swelling well drained.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it needs to be sutured the first time, start again the second time a little higher up, because the blood is salty; do not doubt about the nerve, as we said, and in this way make the same shape on the other leg.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The blood vessels of the sciatic nerve are at the ankle, and the suturing is worth the pain of the thigh when it is for a wound.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of the suturing is that the patient gets wet or soaked, and it comes out of the ankle with 4 twists, because otherwise it doesn't open; and if it opens, then make it in all ways that you can, and cross it over; and worth more than you chop it, because the blood vessels are swollen, and it is very pulpy.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't tie it up, if the wound opens or closes from the foot to the little toe, and turns it over, and guards the nerve; and make the blood flow so that you can see it, and then loosen the bandage, and put cotton on it and hold it in place; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	vacuums
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or bone, or glass; and the vacuuming is done in two ways: by striking and drawing out blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this vacuuming that is without striking... so is done with twelve points of the body: at the head, where the windpipe is; at the neck; in two places on either side of the neck; under the chin; over the shoulders; along the arms; along the legs; and along the ankles. And this vacuuming does not treat blood from minor veins that are scattered throughout the chest, or else it would weaken the whole body; but it should be done with fire or without fire in any illness that comes from overeating, until the whole body is empty.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of illness it becomes necessary to ventose, or because of customs, we should regulate each hour in the beginning of the month or at the end and in each season; for there are such who, when they need to ventose, become very heavy; and those who experience a full face, and a swollen head, and a red complexion in their face, and in their head, and darkness in their eyes; and those who exhale a drop of blood from their mouth, and have escaped the tongue, and thirst for blood; and if there are those who dream, and see no nutrition, or nausea, or death, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and more so when the month is half over, we order them to ventose after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The surgeon's aid to the grief of the head... comes out through the eyes, and it is not until after the whole body has been evacuated that this ventilation takes place; and this ventilation is in place of the relief of the cerebral pain, and it is not suitable for those of a cold complexion, or those who are hoarse, because it does them great harm; and for this reason it is not suitable for those who stay up late at night, or who have had a cold recently.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are cured of it often become dizzy, and for this reason the suction cup should be placed a little farther downstream due to the doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And the suctioning removes the wind from the throat at the level of the healing of the head and the bazileus, and for this reason it is used to extract it from the stomach, and to cut and fill; and it should be gently pushed back, because if it holds too firmly, it may cause dizziness or upset the stomach.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And the suctioning of the wind from the costels of the throat causes pain in the head, and blurring of vision and pounding, and strangles, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and is at the level of the healing of the bazileus; and you must instruct the healer that he press his hand to it, that he not cut the artery, and not let out the blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind-chills of the mouth bring on disease of the mouth, and decay of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and they are in the region of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind-chills of the shoulders bring on a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind-chills of the arms bring on as much pain as three veins in the arms, since they draw blood from those large veins; and command the patient not to be too thoroughly covered, for their limbs are exposed, and there are nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The wind-chill that is on the back brings on hemorrhoids from the fundament, and similar diseases; and it is that the wind-chill be great, and of air, that it has the task of well milking; and perhaps, if it were subtle, it would break; and it would make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventouse of the legs if they open wide, because they draw blood from all over the body, and match the old pains of rain, and of the womb, and of the bladder, and turn back the flowers; and are in place of the two shoulders, and of the two ankles, but they do weaken the body after a long use, and bring premature death to many types.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the ventouse is that you should first place it, and suck quickly, and put it firmly, and move it evenly, and do not cease doing this until you see the red and inflamed spot, and feel the pain of blood; then firm up, and remove the ventouses, and take care in the state of the bodies, for there are some who have great toughness, and clear pores: so it is necessary to wound once only, and to make deep wounds, and a little bit deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if it is thick outside, it needs to be pricked twice: once to soften the path for heavy blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if it is very thick outside, it needs to be pricked three times; and when we want to drain the blood little by little, we only have to squeeze once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to drain blood, we start often; and if the outside is thick, we finish it completely so that the wound ends with a piercing cry, and because it comes to those who have hard and rough skin, and who have suffered much, you spread oil on the lees of the vials: if it is in summer, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in winter, of chervil oil, or of lime flowers, or of chamomile, or any other similar oil.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if it is a large and cold surplus, then take oil of amber, or of balm, or of anise, and the like.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if a person has a sore that is tender and wide, you should not put oil on it, but you should wash it after the wind has passed with rosewater, or cold water, or water from mulberries, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have moisture, if it goes away with it, or with water from Myrrh, and Sumach, and the like.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large surplusages should rise with old wine, or with water from Sassafras, or with an infusion of fennel or chamomile, or other things; and it is not appropriate to saunter before a bath or in a bath, but after an hour or two; and one should not sleep after the wind has passed, and when he needs to be winded, as often as he needs to.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware of those who are ill with colic, and have too much gas and are inflamed; it is necessary that he eats cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce, and similar things; and he eats little, and rides a chariot, and wet meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, drink syrup of honey and smelling wine, which is between old and new, and little food, and small birds and pigeons; and on the day that he sweats, he should drink more than eat; and it is necessary to give some men three times or musk before and after wind, to strengthen the members; and soften the skin, but it is not good for everyone; only those who are warm should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The poultices that are not painful are those that are placed on the liver, and on the mouse, and podagr, and on the belly, and the boud, and the rains, and the hainche; because this member does not feel pain when it is put on the oozes, and we do so only in order to attract blood from one member to another, as when we place poultices on the nipples when the milk is not flowing; in order to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as when we place poultices on the belly and the boud in order to reduce the member; and so it is done when it is placed on the liver and the mouse when there is repressed wind, and these poultices are emptied empty because they suck so much; and they are never emptied together fire, and never plain water, as with pleurisy, and in this way we fill the poultice with hot water, or with water in which he has cooked herbs suitable for it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	The shape of the suction cup administered to fire is as follows: It should be two hands wide and half a palm deep, and it should have a small opening at its center, about the size of an awl, so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle a cross bar of iron or steel, so that a hand can grip it, and there are large and small ones depending on the illness and age of those who use them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of thin people are different from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And this is how the suction cup should be placed on the limb: Take the wax thread or bandage and place it across the center of the cup, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then place it on the limb, and the two fingers should be on the opening that we have mentioned, so that when you lift it, if there is vapor, and then remove the suction cup; and take the bandage as before, and renew it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the vacuum pump therefore which is amineised in disease of pleurisy, there is no water, no verge nor perforation, and it is amineised only when it is plain of water, and put on the limb so little; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Do not amineize the sucks except in limbs where you cannot put vacuums because of their smallness, as lips and gums, and similar ones; and in the flesh of a horse, if it is two or three days old, and others like them; and the quality of using them is that when you find sucks that are in sweet water without risk of porridge, take them; put them into sweet water, until they are familiar, and have nothing in their bellies; and then let them be amineized from the vein and the vacuum, and then rub the limb until it is red, and put the sucks on; and when they are plain, and are cherring, if there is a place where you can put a vacuum, put it, because that is worth more afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then lift up the joint, and then with water, very well, and then squeeze it; and if the joint is too sore after the chest of the swallows, then moisten a linen draping in cold water, and put it on, until the swallows are dried out; and if the swallows are multiplied, then put crushed vitriol, or gall, and similar things on them, until they are dried out; or you put half of peeled beans on the joint, and leave them until they burn at the joint, now it will be stopped; and if you need more, take other swallows.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If the swallows won't take hold, then rub the joint with fresh blood, or you put an needle in it as long as a swallow comes out, and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they will burn; and when you see that they are peeing, then sprinkle a little powder of aloes and seer-sands, or ash, so they will pee now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the translation of the text:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapters of this treatise are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and serve for the restoration of broken bones and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Understand, you who read this, that the wise men of old did not pour this liquid onto themselves from any of the books or letters; and because of this, knowledge of it has been lost in our land, for I have never found a good one; and I do not know anything about it, except by means of the ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have practiced the science, and by experience, and through my own experience and custom. I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments used, as I did in the two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore it is appropriate that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters in which the sage places his understanding, and delays on truth, so that those who are tested may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d'une part et d'autre, s'aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n'est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c'est a savoir froides joutes, et char d'oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne mejunce nules grasses chars, et ne s'emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n'aies doute d'aposteme chaut, ne d'espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k'il a useit.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed with meat that is a great fattening, or viscous as cooked flour, and rice, and testicles, and pies of veal, and exercises, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a great fattening prevents the break from healing more slowly and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot heal or harden the members together as nature requires because of the weakness of the bones, nor those that are too soft, like the bones of small children; but it is necessary to join them with large joints that stiffen and bind the member together, as much as they were before; and do not at all take away from their work, and for this it is necessary to feed them with great meat, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breakers are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break in the head is different from the break in the leg, or the foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a break that comes with age, and another from splitting, as the blade of a pen to write with.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a break with a wound, and a break is all a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own tool for the restoration, according to what comes back to its place; and it is done by turning the bone by hand, and opening it well from one side, and applying pressure with the palm of the hand; and when there is no twisting or curvature, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture; but it may have twisting, or a split, or a small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not necessary for you to move him with your hand, but put on the medicine that comes next, and then restrain it now gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that went in the arvol, and are the II parts separated, it is now necessary to put them at a point even, so that the chaus come and i viegne; and if the chaus are hot, he leaves them no day, as long as the apostemes are calmed; then put them even at the mues that you can easily and safely, and know that the restoration of him is more easy than the restoration of the one where there are pieces; then restrain it, so as it is necessary here after.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are pieces broken, if the extension of II parts, it is hands or foot, or to your hand if it is a small member, or to II strings, or to a string and to your hand; and put the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are repaired, you keep by all means the additions in their places at the mues that you can, and guard that by your work does not come to the patient injury or pain; and adjust well the II bones of the member according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And the test is good to the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if the dressing is done well, and do not strain too much, do not press so as those who make it come by their overshot aposteme hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in order, let the patient chastise himself that he does not move it, neither awake nor sleep, nor turn, nor in any other way; and guard well that the member be so secure that it feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, he is not yet in order, and the disposition must be made that he feels no pain; and guard well that it be put rightly, that twistedness does not come when he is restored; and the quality of the member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken member is diverse in little and in great and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are little members, such as wrist and foot and similar; so wrap linens and soft cloth around them; and those that are large, such as thigh and leg: so wrap a wide and sturdy linen around, for the wide linen embraces the entire large member and holds it in place evenly on all sides so that there is no gap; then gently tighten, III turns or IIII according to the member, and hold back the hand a little at a time from the top of the break, then loosen the linen a little and a little, until you have pressed most of the blood out from the site of the break; then take another linen, and wrap it tightly around again; then go back to the broken end, and tighten it a little bit, not too tight nor too loose, as we said in the first line about; then place between the linings that are wrapped in linen or cloth, until they are all even, then tie them together well, if there is an abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or an inflammation, put warm things on it that are soothing, and let them rest for some days; then draw out with your fingers, and make a half-inch long notch in the middle of a wooden rod, or of a stalk, or of palm leaves, and make it according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And if there is an abscess or inflammation, put warm things on it that are soothing, and let them rest for a few days; then draw out with your fingers, and make a half-inch long notch in the middle of a wooden rod, or stalk, or palm leaves, and make it according to this figure: but it is necessary that the stake that one puts on the fracture should be a little thicker and wider than the others; and also be as far away from the limb as it fits; then draw out on the stakes as you did in the first lieure, then tie a thread together, as in the first lieure on the fracture; the tighter it is, the better; and it is necessary that the thread be fine, not too thick or too thin, and made of linen; for if the thread is thick, such as I have seen made by the foolish ones who make their ligatures out of threads, it is a great mistake, because the lieure will not be even if it is too tight, and it only deserves to be tied so that there is less than two inches of space between each stake.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pregnant and the teeth of the stars are cut after extraction in her health, then let them be bound with linen or another rag so that they do not bleed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise and the scar is broken, I will say the cure for this later on.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not come to extract stars from all the broken limbs the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it does not come to put stars on them before the fifth or seventh day, or more according to the severity of the abscess; and here is the way of the ancient emboweling to restore a break, a dislocation, and a twist: and that you take flour that stays on the walls of the mill, and confound it with good chalk, and put this composition, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common way of the emboweling restoring a break to many dispositions, and most especially to women and small children, for it is not too late nor too short.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take resin and myrrh and ochre and asafetida and arabic gum and mugwort, 5 Z.; frankincense and aloe, 5 V.; alchemiş, 7 VIII.; and make a powder, and mix it with egg yolk of hen; if the complexion of the body is warm, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly heals broken bones, and is useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering for healing twists: take mugwort and castor oil, 5 Z.; frankincense and aloe, 7 VIII.; acacia, 6 Z.; Armenian bole, 10 Z., and finely grind it, and mix it with egg yolk or hen's egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to make plaster for joints and bones that have come out of place, to soothe the pain, and to fix the size, use a fresh cow's skin, and soak it in water and oil, and put it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Cists emplastres ne restourent mie, mais il est bons pour apaisier d'aposteme chaute, et ostre proprement les dolors.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of applying an ointment that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth-paowl leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of applying an ointment to heal broken bones and to soothe the remaining pain of an abscess: take dried fig leaves and earth-paowl leaves, grind them together, and make an ointment.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take roots of marsh-mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, and from each one a part; grind them together, and confer with wine, and the members are heated, confer with water or salt, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of applying an ointment that is stronger than the first one, in case of persistent abscess before healing the broken member: take roots of marsh-mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, and from each one a part; grind them together, confer with wine, then apply with water or salt.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of wormwood, and seedling of flax, burdock, melilote, and stinging nettle, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part with another; and grind, and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iocris in his book said that one should not put on the broken member any cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to me that one should put on the broken member, in order to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as mirr, aloe, incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of making plasters which is good for wounds and pain: take wool and hair of sheep, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, and hemp evenly, and grind them, and make them into a plaster and put it on the flesh.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little after, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved out of place; if pain comes to the spot, or itchiness, or no rest or swelling, so hurry up, and loosen it, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a sponge moist with sea water, and dip into the water, and lift up the joint, until the itchiness ceases, and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with water or oil and tie it to a nut, until you are sure that the abscess is warm; and relieve the inflammation of the member, and alleviate the pain, then restart the gentle loosening, and a little of the plaster, and do not pull it as hard as before; and gently until he is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen all over, and you need to use plaster and binding, if it starts again, just as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if it does not come to the member at all of what we have said, but only after III days or IV or V or VII; and never more than XX days, according to what is seen, until the break becomes sharp, and approaches the shoulder joint; then restrain it more than at first, and let it fatten its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the place is drying up more than it should, then dip it every time you release it in warm water, each time for three days, and leave it a little wet. By this work, therefore, cut off the nerves to the member, and carefully remove what they form, that restores the member incorrectly: this is painful, and if it is painful, and I do not see anything else but to make it limp and then set it straight properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Of the diverse ways of breaking.
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Of the diverse ways of breaking there are, and of various figures, the causes are different: for there is a breaking which is made by the impact of an axe, and all the bone is broken from its socket, so that it is like one or another; and because of this this way of breaking is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the axe breaks the bone from above, and this way of breaking is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two great or small breakings.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	Or if there is impact from within, or a crack, or a broken collarbone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating break, which approaches to the skin which is out of its socket, or which is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that has penetrated the bone as fine as a hair, and is a small fracture, and because of this it is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is made by a stone, or by a fall, or by some other thing, and makes a piece of bone enter; and if the head of the bone is placed so as to form a kind of ring as the blacksmith does when he works on the cauldron; then it goes into the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more often to those who have their heads wet, so that they are like a child's head; and to all these kinds of fractures, small pieces are broken off as if they were cards; and I will speak about it in due course.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the kinds of fractures by traction on them, and by the tent of the tar which is on it; and by the corroding lead which is on it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is created by the fact that when the bone is uncovered and rubbed with fire, it opens the black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be careful of accidents due to disease, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting, loss of understanding, extension, palmitation, feverish water, and hair standing on end, and other similar signs in multiple conditions, then he cannot recover by doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in spring, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone does not rot, and the accident we have mentioned occurs.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the membrane that covers the skull, so it is necessary that you split the broken part in this way: and it is that you press the head of the patient strongly, and uncover the bone in all ways that you can, and on the shape of the wound more softly than you can, and if the evacuation of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess, help him with what is necessary, and is that you fill the place of the membrane moistened with oil and rosin; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calmed, and are certain about the evacuation of blood; then begin to split the bone, and this is done according to two ways: one way is that you split the narrow end in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I bottle another way more wide than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have different kinds of tails, some are thick and others are thin, and they are pointed, and made of iron; and work lightly, so that you do not hurt the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and firm, it is necessary that you pierce it inside, so that you place the tails with barbs, not completely piercing through the bone's spine, and must have above the point a margin or a circle, so that it does not pass beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes in its place of the spine of the bone, so that you have barbs for all test; and this is the form of the three ways of bars:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce inside the bone is that you place the barb on the bone, and turn it with your two hands until you know that the bone has been pierced; then put the barb somewhere else a little after, and do this everywhere, and cut out the space of the bone which is between the pegs, and make it more finely than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you take the bone in your hand, or in any of the tools that you have, such as pliers, pincers; and keep from touching the cerebrum or the syfac.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and worked it, if it seems to you that you should take care of the marrow which is delayed in the bone by all the instruments resembling an incisors, but it is necessary that it be more flexible and finer than the other incisors; and if it does not delay any small bones or scales, if it is broken lightly on the instruments. Then cure the wound with tar and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way to work it is as Galen says, which is safer; and press it very hard, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break is open, so that when you have discovered this part, you put on top of it the end of this lens-shaped incisor, from which comes this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is wet in two sides, so that the cutting is opposite the bone; then hard with a small hammer above, so that you gently beat the bone all around, and you are well guarded from the cloth that is dislocated; if it is caught on the bone, gently beat the bone, for the bone does not cause great harm, and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce until the cloth, and the bone is cut so little above, and there are small pieces, then cover again that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine razor whose you must have different quantities, to distribute in each case the most convenient, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If there are more than a few sharp razors, and then some finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other haircuts and fine shaves, you must bring about cause according to its adaptation; and this is a thing that is not readily answered to him who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the syrup is uncovered, you should bring a linen towel, according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten it with oil and place it on the wound; then take another towel, folded in two or three, and moisten it with wine and oil and place it over the first towel; and do so more lightly than you can, so that you do not weigh down the syrup, and then wrap it up again, and do not remove it except when it has dried on the wound; and leave it like this for a day or two, until the abscesses have become calm, then take off the wrap, and administer medicines as roots, flour of vitriol, powder of incense, and such-like things; and from these things make powder, and put it on the wound, and administer medicines without taste, so that the wound is kept clean, and do not allow the wound to remain unclean, nor do you allow anything to gather over it, because when bowstring gathers over the silk of the scalp, if it korrects and rots, it brings great misfortune to the patient; for when you put something bitter on the syrup, if you wrap it tightly.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, so that no bad accident comes to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blacken does not come but only because of the medicine that has been put on it, whose virtue it is, let you press one part of honey and three parts of oil and glues one garland, and lay it on his wound; then he cures in a way as he knows, until he is healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You should know that no time are the two parts of the nose broken above, or one by itself, for they are two bones; and this bone is cartilaginous, and does not break unless it bends or twists, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, let you drive your little finger or pin from the nose, and set the break even with your index finger, and at the opposite end, until the nose regains its natural shape; and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain because of your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if his break is in the upper part of the neck, and cannot come to its place, you must put it even at the top of a thin ray.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if his break is in two parts, so deal with it otherwise, and hurry to restore the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or ninth, when the abscess has calmed down, then bandage the neck with linen strips, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another with another part, if his break is; and may the strips be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that there must be no restoration unless the strips are moistened with tar and changed every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I do not think that this is good, but it seems that the strips should be moistened with oil of olive and powder of mullein; then leave the bandage on until the bone is hard and the cartilage has healed.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And at no time put feathers in place of tents, and if it has a wooden frame, hold the frame steady, and let the wind blow through the tent, but do not make it so that the sick person can see outside.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess develops during surgery, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil or salve, or a patch of gauze.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess does not develop, apply an ointment of flour and incense, mixed with oil of almonds; then put it on light bandages, and do not bind the wound; and if the rupture of the wound is small, and it is broken into pieces, extract them with appropriate instruments, then cut off the torn part, and cure things that cause pain, and suddenly, as if it were an ointment and oil appropriate to it; and if there is no wound inside the wound, then cure the tent, and put tarpaulins, until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	About the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is broken and there is no wound, and the break is so slight that it is not split into two pieces, but only bent inside, then it must be treated lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the break is on the right side of the jaw, you should stick your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left side of the jaw, stick your index finger of the left hand inside, gently pushing the break back into place, and with the right hand make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jaw break is in two places, you should bring the two parts together, making them even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if there is movement from the inside, or the break, then stretch it out with a gold, silver, or silk thread; then put a cap on the broken jaw, and put a double cloth over it; and put a large, well-made piece of leather, the same length and width as the jaw, over the cloth, and tie it tightly to the mandible with a knot you can see; and order the patient to rest, and eat light food.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	Et si tu vois que la figure change, si le désaisies au troisième jour, puis remet à point ce qui a changé; et met emplastres dessus, de la poudre de moulin avec abondance d'œuf ou de farine de sisement, après ce que tu as ôté le cerote; et met sur l'emplastre autre chose légère, et si l'emplastre s'agite, et la disposition du malade ne change pas, laisse-le tant qu'il soit sain; souvent il est sain en trois semaines.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses break out, so that you send what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not send a small piece of bone; if the wound is subtle, use instruments suitable for that.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is tight, so that you open it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have made all these bones, and there is no delay, if the wound is wide, put on it plaster that is suitable for this, to dry up, as long as it is well.
de la forcele	and with care
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	and with care Break several times in advance before the shoulder, and the break is according to three ways: or it is broken and torn into two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a break with injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is as follows if the break is without injury, that you have two ministers, so that one dries up the shoulder joint; and the others extends the neck towards the injured part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or haircut.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have need to do more, so take a long round of cloth, or of other fabric, and make it big according to your need; and bind and tighten the roundness, and hold the roundness towards your hand, so that you make the break even, as is right.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder away from behind, so that it comes out whole, let the patient lie still on his back, and set the shoulder under an ear, and push the ministers of the shoulder down, until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then set the break on your two sides, and if you find it broken, so let you split it up; and draw the pieces lightly apart, and if the bone cannot join by any means, so put this instrument of the shoulder against it, to keep the medicine in.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and seems like a spoon, and is not a hair, and is also wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the ability of the work; and has two heads, if you see, and one is wide, and the other is small, as the cut made by you when you broke the bones; and when you are confident that the apotheosis is hot, if the wound is deep, and the cut is small, or if you doubt about the apotheosis being hot, then cover the wound with linen and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot apotheosis comes, if it moils in oil and honey and wine, and put on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if hot apotheosis comes, if it soaks in oil and honey and wine, and put on. The extraction of the bone, when there are wounds and no fracture, is that you put plaster on the bone with powder from the mill and ash of eggs, and apply light strokes, and put a spike around the joint, if you need to; then take a very thick band of about a palm wide, then put linen twice over the strokes, and plaster it on; then take a thin stake of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it tightly around that band, so that the top of the band is hanging; and put the stake on the break, and tie the band around the neck, and extract the joint slowly; and the release of each part, and when you see clearly that the stake does not move aside from the bone, then release it every day, and when the ligaments loosen, if they restrain; and make the sick person walk on his back, and put a little shift around the joint, to raise the shoulder; so that the fracture is lightened by the strength of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it unless there is no accident; until XX days; then start again with plaster if you see that it needs it, and extract it and leave it like that, until it is healed; and it is healed in about XXX days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	for the dislocation of the shoulder
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone protrudes forward, and there is no need to break the knee, if it is done so, and the bone, and do as we have said in breaking the forcelet of soothing an abscess quickly.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break from the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The leg is never broken in the middle, but it does happen sometimes; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it declines to the knee, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of air, and sometimes vomits blood, and feels a good bit of pain in the broken bone, and smells bad.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lie down on his back, and put the cloth between the shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and join the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and make it even as well as you can, in all ways, until the figure of the bone is like this; then wrap it in a bandage, and cover it with plaster, or other light material, and tie it tightly on the bone, so that it does not move; and return the cloth to its place, and tighten it, and loosen it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it again; and if it needs to be loosened for corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, do it quickly, and loosen it, and remove the plaster, and treat it with remedies; then remove the plaster, and tighten it until it is well.
de la brisure des costes	of the rupture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	I say that the rupture of the ribs does not come except in large ones after the back, and at the top inside, and do not bend much except because they are shiny; and the sense is good to the inquiry with the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And restore them so that you put the break even, as it is right.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then put on the plaster, and tie with a cord from an anchor, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rib break is declining inward, then the patient feels great pain and cramping, as if it were a cry; for the bone does not stretch the skin; and he goes blind, and constantly vomits much blood, and this is a grave injury to health, and they have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if any of those who serve say that it is right to administer meat that swells the belly, so as to push the break out.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, unless heated abscesses come, if they do not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, and the health.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that we put cups on the place, to draw by suction from form, and it seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cup does not attract the excesses to the place for the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that one should cover the place with another wet cloth in oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the space equal, then cure it with the cure of plague, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain so that he cannot bear by the bone that pokes the cloth, there is doubt for the patient, so one should split above the place of the broken rib and put there some instrument to ward off disease; and then one should chop the bone, and draw lightly, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and cure with poultices until he is well.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come up, put them on oil-soaked bandages and place them in the place they should be; while healing the place where it is to be an abscess, and sitting patiently on the coast where it should be until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No time comes with a break of the bone of the neck, and there is no need to weep; and also at the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this has happened to anyone, and you can see whether he will be healed or not, if his hands become soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch them, and when you touch them with a needle, if he doesn't feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that he is mortal in many dispositions, and if he cannot move them and feels well when they are stretched out, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is healed, if you put medicine on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	Et s'il y a une masse au dos, tu dois savoir s'il est sain ou non; si les os sont mous, et si l'accident qui l'a causé est encore dans ses mains, et s'il y a des ventitions et des evacuations sans volonté; et quand on le soulève sur son ventre, s'il y a des ventitions sans volonté.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And if there is a mass in the back, you must know whether it is healthy or not; if the bones are soft, and if the accident that caused it is still in its hands, and if there are ventitions and evacuations without will; and when it is raised on its back, if it can't.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is fatal: do not work in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come from him, this is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you reward if there is an abscess, put oil or cow's milk on the spine, as long as it is relieved; then put on one of the plasters confortingly and drying, and tie it with a knot, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where he feels pain, until he is healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones are separated, if it is necessary to put plaster over the joint; and set the bone, then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a stitch, then treat it with ointment carrying water until it is healed; and if the bone is broken, which is called "the break of the cheek", if you hold your cup in your left hand, and put plaster on it with your right hand, then make it even; and put the patch and tie it up; and if there are any bones that have been separated, then press them together, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	the break of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	If the thigh bone is broken, and if it happens, let there be only a little reduction at the head; and let it be extended, and let it fall on the side, and let the pain and swelling come to the patient in that place, and do not cut off what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the repair is that you extend your hand above it as long as you are on top of the break; and know what the break is and what its shape is; and if the break is at the root of the shoulder, then make this break equal, as long as it is in a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on his stomach, as long as the repair of this break has been arranged for him.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it equal, then put on the plaster, and then put a board of wood or of board, and tighten the break so that it does not move, and hold the joint in place as long as it is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come out, don't scratch them, as long as these abscesses are calm, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the repair and tighten it as necessary, unless there is any bad accident; and this is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	of the dislocation of the shoulder is what lies between the collar and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then one should restore it according to one of the two ways: one is that you take a strong rope, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And the two joints are tied together and hoisted up, and cut the patient on a bench; then, with an ax, split the arm over the fist, so that it comes to rest at the shoulder, and have a strong rope tied to it, and pull it down with all your might on one side or the other until it is back in place, and have a large beam of wood placed under it, then hang it from a heavy object or support it with your hands, so that the broken arm comes to rest as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	The other way is that the patient is held by his hair, and the hand is tied to the collar, then you order the ministers: one holds what is above the break in his hands, and the others tie the whole thing together, extending each part as needed.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that extraction is too forceful, then hold the sinews apart, and over the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the shoulder blade, then you should put the sinews apart at the break, and over it, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the break is on one side of the neck, then you should put the sinew apart gently, without exerting much effort, as long as the break is even with the neck, and even with the ear; then set the break even, as it should be, and hold it in place, unless the arteries come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the arteries come, then do not hold it back for more than seven days, and put a damp cloth on the break, and oil onto it, until the break has calmed down; then hold it in place, and the way to hold it in place is that you put the plaster on the break, then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the side; and wrap a bandage around, and hold it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its correct position, unless something prevents it from moving, or the bone is broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone doesn't move, then use a lever, and put on the fracture one more wide and strong than the others, and have between each of them two spaces, and let each be so big that it goes through the break three times; then lift up by the levers, as I said at the beginning about the paste on the fracture, stronger and less by moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the levers and the lifting up, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the member broken, and you doubt the abscess warm, let it rest tied for seven days, as we have said; then look at each three days to see if it is swollen or not coming to the member because it is too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If prescribed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	If such an accident occurs, if only it were not that the shoulder is dislocated more than three days ago, and the patient sleeps on his back with his hands on his stomach; then put a cotton plug of equal thickness at each joint, and observe every hour during the day or night whether the figure of the limb does not move, or the ligaments are not relaxed; if it responds to the power of medicine, and give him food as we have described above, in such a way that the food is in the first layer. And when he begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is usual that the shoulder and leg should be reset after forty days of all; and then it should be dislocated and administered baths and medications to set it right.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if it is stiff and encrusted, it will take one or two months to loosen it up.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile," one small and one large, with the small being at the top and the large below it; or perhaps the large one may break on its own, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small "foscile" is broken, the restoration is easy and the healing; and when the large one is broken, it is a bad healing, and more painful than when they are both broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small "foscile" is broken, then what you must do is to gently extend it and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If only the large  "foscile" is broken, then you must pull it more strongly; and extend it on one knee, and turn the elbow of the arm with pain towards the ground, and the small elbow below the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, and a minister's arm at the injured part near his hand, or leg, and another minister's arm above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then make him hold it in place, according to his best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken into pieces, place each one in its place, and if any of them fall out again so that they cannot be held in place, and you cannot restore them to their places, then do as we have said above:
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the break comes injury, I have spoken of it in the chapter on singуляр; take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of restoration come sore pustules, if I bind with a plaster made of rose oil and white wax that is neither too hard nor too soft; and I bind it carefully from above, until the sore pustules are calmed down.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then tie the oste with cerote, and I put the plaster of the powder from the mill with a lot of flour, because I put the splinters, and let the splinter be placed closer together than the others; and know that it must have VI splinters or more: whether the splinter is in one bone or II; and draw them up higher than elsewhere, and always less by moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter on singуляр; and may the cloth that is on the splinter be soft and moist, and may not be either too hard or too small, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the limb and its joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you soak the member in hot water until the itching subsides; and let the member rest without constricting it.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin again to extract, and if the joints are softened and the bone is displaced, and similar things, address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the healing does not progress with the member constricted, because it is too constricted, then you must soften it slightly and leave it for a few days, until the healing improves, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said comes to the illness, then do not remove the member until XX days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or en quenye, then the pent the hands to his neck, and be the necks equal, and se guard from movement and degradation, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruiser is restored in XXX days or XXXV, and by adventure in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	 know that at the back of the hand and to us two there are few breaks, and comes but that plied many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or plied, so that the patient dies crosswise, and sits correctly before him evenly; then put his hand on a cloth spread out, and extend the broken bones, and make them even miraculously, until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and stumps, if there come any, then put an ewer according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped up in I draping of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks within the پاردرنس between the navel of the plant, then make a rope of drapels, and command the patient that he strangle it to his navel broken; and then take out of a long drapeil, and be its stake of keur so great as the plant of the hand, and strangle it, if it should.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks on the outside, then it is necessary that you put a stake on it, and another desoz in the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it completely around the hand, and stop the flow between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks on one of the two sides, let it be even, as it should be; and tie it with the plant, and if you see that it moves, put a straight little stake to lift the break, so that it does not move; and if the break is on the other two, as in the index or one of them, let it be even, and tie it with the sound hand that is after; or you bind them all together holding, so that they do not hurt, or put a stake on it, as if it were a pouche; and take care of the restoration and arrangement of the aphisteme, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the chest bruise
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The rib cage is often bruised, and it can be clearly seen when it moves forward and backward; and the healing process is as follows: bandage above the injury, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	The patient lies down and spreads his or her limbs evenly; then the injury is removed from the face, and both limbs are spread out equally; and it is when the rib is separated from the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the rib is next to the root of the chest, then one of the limbs is stretched forward at the elbow, and the other limb is stretched backward, away from the injury.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is next to the knee, then one of the limbs is stretched at the knee, and the other limb is stretched downward; and he places the bone back in its natural position with his two hands, and then puts the plaster on, and ties it up, so that it does not move.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it be calmed then return to your work and your treatment; the time is made in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, wrap it in a dry cloth twice or three times, and stay until the surplus goes away, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the birth, and put a long thread between the thigh and the leg, removing the kneecap, and bring the chief of the thread up; then turn again on the leg and the thigh the bandage, then put on the splint, and put a splint on the bone of the leg; then employ the space between the leg and the thigh with towels to make the strapping even, then begin to tie in three or four twists on the splint; and as you go up on the splint, and less strapping; then untie the two threads that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and lie III splints that are above, then return to the kneecap, until you come off the foot; and the strapping, if it does not move from its place, then let it be like this, then if there is no swelling or another appearance.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it comes out, if it dislocates, and addresses what comes out, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that hold on, if one can, yes; and if one cannot, then split the place, and pull it hard; and treat it as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the rectum broken as we put stakes there, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, when restoration is made in this way, the patient does not cry out.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the rectum is restored in a day or less or more, depending on the differences of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the ganglion
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the ganglion there is little rupture, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, if it is only a split or a gash, and has all the injuries, and there are no injuries, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the healing, if one puts equal that which is round on its two, as long as it can be assembled moved then put the plaster, and put a smooth stone, if you need it, and hold it in place as it should be, then make all the provisions that we have said in other breakers, as hot wound and another similar; put to each accident what is appropriate to him, until he is well.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called by right "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all the other breaks are the same as those of the arm, and for this reason the healing is the same as that of the arm, and all the work is done. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his thin bone is broken, turn him around.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly; and turn away.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply traction, and make it even, and bind the bones evenly; but nevertheless, when a fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the traction must be lighter and gentler; and align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, take two long hair braids that purple the leg on one side and the other, and are long from the ankle to the heel; then wrap them over it twice and tie in the middle, and at this ligature cannot go down to the right or left of the leg, and so is good; and if there is a hair missing, then put some in its place or another; and move each day the leg, so as to see if there is an abscess or any other accident; if the cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	about the break of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot there is a fracture in one case out of many, and it has only been fractured in many situations.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	If there is a fracture in the foot, and you see these bones sticking out above each other, so that the patient can't put their foot on the ground, as if they wanted to walk, then now place your foot on two boards flat together, let the bones come up, then press them down until they get back to their places; then plaster it and bandage it, and place a small board under the stomach of the foot, then tighten it to the front of the foot, then you have wrapped blankets around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, if the swelling has gone down, because you will find the bones even, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	Et s'il i a aucuns des deux brisiez, si les restoure, si com nous avons dit as deux de la main; puis met au deux brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou deux, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j'ai dit, et l'estrain avenanment; et s'il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun deux une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu'il le teigne bien.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And remember not to forget the other things that I have said about other types of fractures; and attend to each injury as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of breaking the bone with a sharp stick
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone is broken by a sharp stick, if the woman is seated enlarged, then she is inclined to the back part of the spine, and held from behind; then fill the vagina with cotton, and put in also much as it stands; then turn the woman over, and gently push the spine little by little, and then let the cotton fall, until it comes to the entrance of the vagina, and joins the bone with the spine; and when she urinates, if she holds the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for seven days: so will be healed the break, and she will not die, take a bladder of cow's milk, and tie a string to the hernia, and pour all the milk into the vagina; then blow in the string forming, until the milk is inside: so will heal the break; then fill it with cotton, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand or foot is broken, if it is restored as we have said with the bone of the thigh; and these fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and work into it, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fracture means many things in the right way of restoration: listen therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the leg, when it is broken, take a duck's neck and pour the leg; then wrap it in linen, and leave it for three days or more, and it will be healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for him who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be healed now, so that the healed things which we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, if the vitriol scald is not removed, then if you have nothing else, then start to restore the break in this same hour, or on that day, if the blisters are not coming out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the blisters are coming out, and if you leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the blisters are calmed down, and do not touch them nor on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is appearing on the third day, it is necessary that you put it back with your hand, lightly and with small extensions.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not arranged to match your hands, then take this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and its width is according to the quantity of the wound; and because it is necessary to dip it in water three or four times, according to what it is necessary for each break; and let it be round and a little thick, so that it does not press on the limb with your work, and is sharp at the front, and thick in the middle:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palanche", because the shoulder blade should be placed on top of the head of the bone; and it is bent once, until it comes back, and is even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is small, and the instrument cannot take hold of the bone well, you must chop off the head of the bone until the instrument can have its way.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back together, as we have said, with an appropriate instrument, whether it is an incision or a saw, within your power; then remove that which is stuck in the bone with rough and small scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its natural position, then moisten the wound with black vinegar and properly sear it; and do not put on any linen or other oil where there is oil, lest it cause pus and corruption to come out; then administer honey when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and wrap the covering all around, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the patient, and brought out on him either death or corrosion, and the instrument has been made softer and gentler than for other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a good accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it does not convenie to put on splints; but wrap them tightly with hard drapes, and bind them fast.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days to bow at the wound, if you have put on what you have put on all alone, and apply an ointment that heals wounds, so as to heal the wound with an ointment of four-fold medicine and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it convenie that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it convenie that the limbs be dislocated in such a way that the bow does not hurt them.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day passes, and he cannot put it back in place but it comes back to him bowing, knowing that there are small pieces of bone that have come off, so that you must tie the wound with tape, and all these pieces of bone that bring about pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula occurs or some other form of corruption, then you must treat it according to what the chapter above discussed.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opens onto the limb, as with the femur or shoulder blade, or other large bones, do not pull it out, for many times death results, but let it rot; perhaps after XX days or XXX, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, then let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	Of bruises that come from the surface of the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Come often after the health of the break, especially when it's near a joint, and it is an ugly sight to behold the member's shape; and perhaps cannot make the member move naturally.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take heed, then, if we have broken ourselves: if we administer stinging medicines, as with aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarccolab, acacia, and others like them; or if we do not use any of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine that is stinging or with the oil of aloes or honey; and put them on the wound in piles, and bind them firmly, and do not remove the bandage for many days; and then remove it, and start again, as long as the nodule is ossified; or you may press it onto a well-made piece of plaster; for the quality of plaster is that it hardens all swelling on the limbs; and if the nodule has already become hardened like stone, it must be cut, taking care to remove only the excess; or take it to a barber, as long as it is hardened, and cure it as long as it remains sound.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb that is weak after confinement
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone has healed, and there remains weakness in the members that are small and delicate, this may happen for several reasons: because he was tied too tightly, and was not tied as he should have been; or because he had too many ties, and could not bring the member to its natural position; or because of numerous injuries; or because of too much movement at the wrong time; or because he has a lack of blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, until the blood multiplies in him; and administer bath, and give pleasure and rest; then put wax on the member, so that the wax draws to it great nutrition, and rubs it often with warm water, until the nutrition corre to the member; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two twisted limbs after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after recovery, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, yet it does not harm its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that the member should be broken anew at the first sign of pain, for many such fools have done this in our land; and these practices are blamed, and great harm and perhaps death result; nevertheless, if the nodules and torments are fresh, it is fitting that they be soaked in hot water, or that soft herbs be cooked, as foils of fat, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the ointment made with a soft substance, as well-made dandelion, and you take the musk of fat, and confit it with the fat of wild boar or oil of sesame seeds, and make the ointment; or you take dried figs, and grind them with hay of corn, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never let the neck be moved continually and longingly with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And so that there is no movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if it is twisted and hardened, as in stone, then it must be opened with a sharp knife gently; and put on tar and study for the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations:
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now brought back gently.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if we delay, and the pains increase, and perhaps he re-sets him at his own place; for in this way, many times, pain and other ills are brought about; nevertheless, when this will come, so make the patient well, then let it rest, until the abscess is calmed down; then raise the member with hot water and oil, then gently adjust it, and cure every limb as the cure comes.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the ointments of dislocations of the shoulders until the foot.
des mandibules	the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And then, if the mandibles have dislocated, they are in two ways: either they are a little out of their places, and become a little soft; or they are completely dislocated, hanging down to the chest, and stopping the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be kept shut, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return it by means of several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, you must immediately reset it, and do not wait; and in this way that the minister holds the chief of the sick, and squirts a little ointment from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, the dislocation is of two parts; and the other two hands should be apart, to make it even; and order the patient that he soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the wound be kept equal until it heals in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And let it be brought back by gentle movement, especially if the two mandibles are together, and if raised with hot water and oil, gently; do not delay bringing it back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they have been brought back equally, and the mouth of the patient is closed well with a soothing ointment made of oil and wax, then let it be gently laid on draping wet with the ointment, and sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two pillows so that he does not move or strive to turn over, but eat lightly, until the pains are gone, and the mandibles are healed; and then feed him lightly, and do not strive to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is well healed.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour and do not return to their places, then fever and usual suddenness come, and perhaps a soluction of the belly, and perhaps vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see that, then you know that it is a sign of death; and many die within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not dislocate from the inside out in the continuation of the neck and the chest, and is dislocated at any time on the side, and it can be felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press the joint with your hand, and it will come back; then put the plaster and bandage on it and hold it in place; and the head that is turned toward the chest cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated at any time, let him return to his place, as we have said; then put the plaster and bandage on it and hold it, and command the patient to rest until he is well; and thus is the shoulder head restored when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	which is dislocated only in three ways: either it has dislocated at the shoulder joint itself; or at the upper part of the blade; or possibly at the top, and never behind the shoulder, nor inside towards the neck; and many times dislocating at the blade's end, but for those who have a lot of money, because with them it would be necessary to go to the hospital; and for those who have enough money, let them stay in place, and return to place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes there is a blow or a crack on some men, and the shoulder is dislocated with heat; and he thinks that it has dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it, until you are sure of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And is known the dislocations when it goes down the neck, and sets a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a pit, and loosen the neck with the head of the shoulder, as if it were a fruit; and cannot the patient bring his hand to his neck, nor make any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upward, it is not hidden, because you see it clearly on the chest; and this way of dislocation is not only for bringing back when it is new, or when the patient has been imprisoned.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the way is that the ministers leave the patient's hand at the top, then put your sleeves off the shoulder, and bring the joint up by force to its place; and the ministers leave the hand, and extend it upward, because they bring it back; so come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our days later, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in hot water; and soft and soothing poultices are applied, as with an infusion of althaea and fenugreek and melilote in water, and are applied; then the patient is put to lie on his back, and a strap is taken from another shoulder of the same, not too loose or too tight, then the patient's foot is placed on the strap, and the head of the shoulder is gently raised, and the hand of the patient is pulled; and other ministers take the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns all at once, and you will see if you follow this way: and it is that you have a man who is greater than the patient; and he stands on one side of his chest, and takes the shoulder of the patient from behind, and lifts the shoulder, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers take the hand of the patient and pull it downward toward his belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then without anything heavy with him, the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if the patient is too light, then without anything heavy with him, the dislocation comes back now. And let us also say that, and we stick a long brand in the ground, whose end is also like a pistol, and not too big or too small; then put on it the sick person, but so that there are drapes above, and the sick person is lying on the long brand; then extend his hand down from the other side forming, and the joint will return to its place safely; and if it does not come back by all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a brand of II arms of great and IIII hands wide, which has the head on one side to enter completely into the assembly, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	And then he lays him on the long pole, that he might not wound the patient, and then he sets the shoulder of the patient; and he extends his arms over the long pole, and sets the shoulder upon the pole, and his arm at the top of the hand, and then puts his arm over a peg of an axe of length, and lets his hands fall, and leaves his body hanging on the other side: the joints are now reset.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in any way, you must put a spear of wool equal, then put the plaster prepared with powder from the mill, with incense and amber, on all the shoulder and back; then remove the shoulder in advance, and tie the bandage to the plaster, and embrace the hand at the neck, and let the hands stay there.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he should drink little, so that the limbs are comfortable, for he will heal more quickly; and then drink a little more after five or seven days, and move them; and if they are hardened and not softened, they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or due to another cause, it is necessary that you apply cauterization to three parts, as it is placed in front or with the paste of the cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and he relaxes after seven days, and the joint does not stay in place, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and you know that the joint has never been put back into its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the chest, and the nipples, or behind, is made by a blow, and an extension of the hands, and I apply another place; and treat until he is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes greasiness to the member, and slowly moves, so the patient bathes many times, until that greasiness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	I know that the joint of the shoulder has been dislocated in many places, and in many ways; and if it is dislocated from all sides, most especially in front and behind; and the dislocation is not reset, for we can see it clearly and feel it well; and let it be dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the dislocated shoulder with the sound one, so that you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is chopped off, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the veins do not come out, for if the veins come out, then it would be grief to bring it back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back from all sides, most especially behind; and if this dislocation comes last, it is more painful than the others, and many die.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is thus, when it is such that she can be brought back, that you extend her hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands of his mirrour according to the knot around the neck, behind and in front, and press the joint to its skin together, or at the root of his palm, until it revives to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocations are in front, then come back when he doubles his hand to his hand, and be firm at the root of the palm where the loop has dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, then give strong extension; and it is that two minister extend the arm, and dip two ministers, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arm of each part, then you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you look at the joint, if you rub it with any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint together, until he revives; and when he is in place, put on dry plaster with auburn of egg, and stretch it together, and tie the arm to the neck of the sick person, and leave it for some days, then loosen it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, let it be, and if you see that the joint is not well-joined, then begin to plaster and tie it, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels pain after the joint has been moved, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press until it is eased; or put wool fat on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then reset it, and let it enter or bath; and when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put the wool fat on again, and then enter or bathe; and do this II times or III, until it is well; and if you see, then put raw sheep's fat that has been heated with butter on it, and strain it over; so it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is less stable than that of other joints, and should be reset as soon as possible while still dislocated, so that the joint swells or an abscess develops.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you reset the hand, let the patient place his injured hand on a tray, and extend his fingers, and make sure his palm is facing the joint's alignment, like this, so that it can move freely while still being reset; then check if it is in the right position; finally, let him put his injured hand on a tray to be extended and reset.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, let the patient place his hand on a tray with his palm facing the joint's alignment.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good; but if not, let him extract the pustules and poultices gently and leave it in that condition without encouraging reinfection.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after some days, then the joint is twisted; and there is no benefit to the patient except that his hands are moistened, and he cannot extract anything at all: therefore know that the nerve is cut, or the artery; if there is another reason for this besides extracting with a delicate cautery, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	When the hand is in place, put the poultice on it as we have said, then extract and leave it for V days, then remove it and leave it.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no injury, if the warm water moistens it and he rubs it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	the dislocation of the two joints in the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	de la dislocation des deux joints dans la main
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Do they remove the scalp of the man from his head?
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the hair of the head or the neck is removed, or many are removed, there will be no cure for the patient, because death comes quickly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the exudations have come out without will, they cannot be held back, and many times a limb is weakened, or the II feet or the two arms or one; and many times the hair at the back moves in four directions; what moves from behind is called 'gilbositez': if it comes from childhood there is no cure for the whole: if not, there will be no healing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting down or striking or similar things, the ancient ways of curing them with great words did not bring much benefit, but I have shortened it according to my intention, and I have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of a broken leg, there is no cure; and also what comes straight into the two sides, and can only be properly cured who comes to the back, as I said; and it is so that the patient should lie on his face in one place, and have a bandage tied tightly around him, so he does not hurt himself; then take a twig of fire and form it into a stick, and another at the feet, and tie a piece of cloth around the leg, and another at the ankles, and two ministers should hold the bands, one at the head and one at the feet, between the two sticks; and they should be firmly tied, as we have said, and the fire-stick put its palms on the spine, until it heals.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if this cure does not work, take a big stick three arms long, and chop off the back wall with it, and let the patient lie on one side, and knock the head of the patient against the side of the table, then put the middle of the table on the spine; and place the minister's hands on the other head of the table, and press hard, until he comes back to his position; and if you see that it hurts, do it at a twist that twists the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you put II torches in the head of the patient with an arm from a tree, and between each torch, back and forth, a palm of space long; and in each torch, a hole, or the turn returns, and are the torches firmly in the ground so that they do not move, and between each pair of torches there is a turning torch, for by doing so the tie turns, and there are II small torches a palm long, to return the turner; and then lie the bond which is among the hands to the turner towards the head, and the other bond towards the teeth on the other turner, and each of the ministers turns his turner on all the bond, and the master puts the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equal, put it on a desiccated plaster with abundant ash, and then the stones, and then the tablet of III fingers long, that by pure his place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine healthy, then tie it with a string as we have said, and use subtle fasting on the patient until he is healthy; and if in the end of the health comes, then administer medicines softening and soothing, with the tablet that we have said before; and never give him a piece of lead, and never comes the appearance behind the spine of the back, and take care that this is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens, for by adventure might come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	That the joints of the hip and shoulder come only from dislocations, not otherwise, but rather as for the other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parties: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, and less in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when one joins the leg with the sick, it is more long and higher than the healthy genitals, and cannot double the sick knee; and is the position which is swollen hot of an abscess, because of this the head of the thigh comes out.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that one which comes to the outside, it is that this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that one which comes to the front, it is that his leg is well arranged according to the achievement; nevertheless, it does not double the knee with pain, and if he is made to walk, it cannot go forward, and holds back its urine, and swells up the ankle, and when he walks, it goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that which is behind him, if it is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the hip is softened, and the head of the thigh is out of place at the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And the signs of that which is behind him, if it is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double over, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the hip is softened, and the head of the thigh is out of place at the side of the ribs. If this dislocation has been there before and does not stay in place according to its disposition, then there is no cure for it; and it only comes from presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four ways of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and make it move inward and outward, and to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for any other cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if he does not return in this way, it is necessary that you prepare the minister strongly, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with one thong that is tied to the knee; and extend another minister his hand above in such a manner that he presses his hands against his sides, then tie him down with a thong on the buttocks; and stretch another one's head of the thong; and they extend upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground all at once, and remains still.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to put the cure on his back, then put the thong on the root of the buttocks, and the line that is out of place, then extend the thong above towards the anus, and towards the force; and another minister should grasp his arms, and embrace the large line of the buttocks of the patient, and extend it to one side: so he will return to his place now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Et if you cannot do this in the way that we have said, it is necessary to tie together the two feet of the sick person with a strong rope under his heels and on his knees, and let the sick leg be extended more than the other; then hang him by the head on a pole, and place two long arms above the ground; and command the minister that he embrace the chief of the chest, and let other ministers hang with the sick person who embraces the chest properly, for the joints now come together again with care.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And if the dislocations are far away, so lay the sick person down as we have said in that which has gibbosity, and remove the rope properly from the sick leg, and also from the foot; then put two torches, one at the head and one at the feet, then place one torch between the legs of the sick person in the form; and let there be placed wet tapestries around, so that they do not burn the sick person, then spread each minister out before him, and let the doctor put his hand on the dislocation equally.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place it on a table, and press it in as we have said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the left side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, if it is convenient to extend the leg of the patient in bed, and according to what I have said; and put the mirrour upon his pain to be under the armpit of the diseased leg, then press with the other hand, and turn it downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is on the far side, so it is not convenient to extend the leg of the patient in bed, do not raise him up from the ground, but rather that he be placed as if his hip was dislocated on the far side, as we have said above in the laying down on two hips; and let him lie on his face, and extend the bandage so as to press it on the joint at the table; and will be complete when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then tie them up, and put the plaster on, and draw out a bandage, so that the hip does not move; and let him rest for three or four days, then take off the plaster, and make him go over, so as to even the members.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	is displaced within and beyond, and behind; and does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	is displaced within and beyond, and behind; and does not dislocate in front. The signs that this is the case are that you order the patient to bend his knee to his shin, and if he doesn't do so at his shin, know that he is displaced; and the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and place his foot on your toes; then take his knee between your palms, and pull apart the two knees at the knee joint; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee has returned to its place, and the signs are that he is bending his leg to his shin lightly; and put the plaster on, and make him move his leg to the shin, and join them together firmly for three days or four, then take it off. And you do not work at moving the patient until the members have become comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, let there be a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, nor completely dislocated inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is dislocated, and turn before to the part where it is dislocated: one should bring it gently to their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated from the top, so that you make the patient sit upright, and support the leg under the ankle; then turn the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, and then extend it upward, and blow strongly on the foot; and do this twice, as we have said, in turning and blowing: if it returns, it is well; if not, then recommence the work, for it will return; and if it cannot return, so make the patient lie down on his back on the ground, and place a staff firmly between his thighs, and tie the bandages around, so that he does not fall; then support the leg with one minister, and other ministers extend the foot in their hands or at their sides, that he may lie upon the staff of col; then each minister extends equally, and the staff is kept in place between the patient's thighs to hold him down while you are supporting him; then put the bandages equally around the dislocation with your hands, and other ministers support the healthy leg under the ankle, and the dislocation will return completely.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is well-healed, then apply the plaster and press it on, and the bandage forms, and fasten the leg to the foot, and hold back the tendons behind the ankle so that the bonds are not too tight; then leave it for two days or three, and the bonds will become looser if the bandage; then release it after three days or four, and let the patient walk after four days. And if he goes before this term, it is not yet certain that he has dislocated it again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses develop, then you must calm them down, as we have said elsewhere, as long as they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, then it is easily repaired without work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the foot, then you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or a table completely upright, and place your foot on what opens up from these joints, then press it down with the foot forming, until it has healed; and when it has healed, and there is no opening, then put a splint on the foot of a table at two joints, then bandage it, and let it free; and let it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and you want to restore it, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in the treatment, unless you are skilled in this art and have practiced it for a long time; and do not be harsh, but use gentle heat at first, and leave the patient to God; if you see hope of health, then immediately set the member back into place, so that the abscesses come to a head; and when the member is back in its place, administer dry things to the abscesses, and treat the wound as needed with ointments; and if there is fracture and broken bones, do what we have said for simple diseases; and guard against entering a path of fear, as I have said, because that will cost you dear according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
