O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book that is the essence of medical knowledge together with its fulfillment, and I have finished it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete this treatise with you, which is part of the work by hand, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work by hand is practiced in our region and spread throughout everywhere, it is excellent in science and capability, and is not delayed from its force but only the small descriptions in books of the ancients that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, there has come error and vanity, and intentions are closed up, and science is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I can vivify this treatise together with the order of this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of the fire cautery, and other instruments of the work by means of the declaration and preparation of it, as is fitting.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for this reason, because there are no good hands masters found in our time, is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who deals with it must master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, as far as he knows the shape and arrangement and separation of the organs, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of bones, and the movement and flowing veins and resting veins, and their source.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, as Iopras says, what is done with the hands is not much, and what is done with work is little; and most of all in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the above-mentioned things should be careful so as not to fall into error and not to harm people; therefore, I have repeatedly warned many of those who deal with this science and abandon themselves without knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess on the throat of a woman, and he also cut the arteries in the throat; so much blood flowed that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another foolish man who treated a stone in the bladder of a man, and the stone was big; he took out a piece of the bladder and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have also been called to treat it with a lever, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone; and if he treated it properly, he would not die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another foolish man who took a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was an injury; and the ignorant doctor pulled out the break onto the wound with a strong lever, leaving no scar on the wound, and left it like that; and he commanded that he not remove it; and he delayed so that the leg became completely deformed and the bones came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to go to him, and I hurried to come to release the leg; and when I released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all paths of corruption had already been established for the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member as long as the members were completely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another miracle, that is, an abscess that was putrefied and then inflamed by the evil of its own nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For chalc, when it is purred with melancholic humor, will not come to touch it unless it is in a favorable position where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, good sons, you should know that the work of the hands is divided into two divisions: namely, that in which there is danger and fear in many aspects; and I will show you in each of the things of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	So that the poor man does not speak ill of you if he takes your weapons away from you, and so that you can take your patients lightly and firmly, and use the better way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are freed; and leave behind expected diseases of grief health; and remove your weapons from him who makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiæn makes some of his admonitions: 'Do not take on yourself a bad disease for which you might be called a madman.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to III chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are fire cauterizations and medicinal water cauterizations, and the chapters are ordered from the top down to the bottom; and the shapes of instruments, and the ironings of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	Si it is for cutting and piercing, and for suction cups and wounds, and for extracting arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is arranged and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is arranged with respect to the head as much as possible, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember the work; it is necessary that I give the quality of the aid and the harm of each color.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the quality of aid and harm is the most distant word and subtle science and the secret answered; and many sages would speak of it, and agree to this; and I am satisfied with a few words, for I shorten the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that aid cautery is universal to all colors or materials, except for two colors; that is, a color that has heat and a material, and a color that is dry and a material.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry mixture of substances, neither agreed nor said that cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that cautery is not worth it for illness that comes from heat and drought.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by hot disease from heat or drought; and he who said that cautery is great help for hot and dry diseases that come to the body's core.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the man and his moisture to the complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have not found it once by experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And any way, only he who has experienced it, and who knows by long practice the properties of cautery, and the diversity of complexions in men, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies, and space of time; we do not fear other complexions, even if they have cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all this should come together and agree with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that fire cautery will help in healing if there are secretions and of greater good than medicinal fire cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it comes only to the member that is cooked, and it does not harm another member in any way.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The medicinal fire comes from one member to another by moving away, and causes diseases of great healing; and because of its height and its substance's goodness it does not cause it, unless there is an excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And which I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I have put into this art, and is based on the truth of things; and because of this I apologize for the length of speech, for it does not please me that I should keep you from the secret that is answered in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives away diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in proving; so accept it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they should be made at certain times and be performed with prayer.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, for because the harm caused by the aid of cauterization is sometimes prevented; and most importantly, the cauterization is done for necessary and urgent pains that cannot be put up with until such time as a greater malady comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think, dear son, as some people do; for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return; and it serves thus: but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is nothing more than a medicine that changes the appearance, dries up the humors that cause pain, and does more good than medicine due to its speed in action, and because of its virtues and greatness of effect.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes according to the constitution of the patient and the place of the disease and its virtue; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of meat and similar things, unless cauterization is administered at the place where he has a little superfluity and moisture, as cauterizing with heat for pain, and similar things, and partial pain does not return but it is little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand because cauterization is called the bloodletting of medicine, and that is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are wrong, and cauterization is the bloodletting of medicine because when we administered ways to treat diseases in any disease and they did not work, then let us administer the cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the bloodletting of medicine, not according to the intention of the foolish, but
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Li ancien dirent que cauteres d'estrument d'or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualité de l'or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n'est mie voir car je l'ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c'est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d'or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	The ancient said that gold cauterization instruments are less corrosive than those of iron, and they only mentioned the quality of gold and its high purity; they said that the heat of the gold cauterization instrument does not cause inflammation, but it is not true because I have tested it, and I found that it is true in some people; and gold cauterization instruments are more durable than those of iron, as they say. However, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is too hot, and it may catch fire; and thus there is sufficient prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this we use fire cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you may order this chapter of the heart to be read just as soon as possible, so that the vision may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive oil cautery is good for a moisture and cold on the skull, and because of many humors that descend from the head through the hair, and through the ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and lameness and apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged with a soothing medicine that washes out the head three or four times, according to what the virtue and the sharpness and the habit of the patient can bear; and then wash the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place the cross between your hands, and put his hands on his chest; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of its neck between its II eyes; and if it comes to you, let the blood flow first, then heat the cautery that is called "olive", from which comes this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the ink signet, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little turning it over; then release your hand slowly, and cover the bone with a little thread; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery as I told you; after that, take a little thread, and put soft cotton inside, and place it on the ink, and let it be for III days; after that, put wet cotton in butter; and let it be until the bone is heated; then cure the wound of the ointment which is called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the old man said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it festers; and for this reason, if it is treated immediately.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should let the fire cautery burn so long that a part of the bone is burned, and then resect what is burned from the bone, and be healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another one said that one should let the fire cautery burn so high and so hard that it exposes the bone as much as possible to allow the humors to exit; and one must leave the wound open for a long time; after which, one must heal and mend.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterizing do not seem good to me in all cases, except that in some people where there is a risk of death; and it seems to me that I should let them be, because the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we witness with other members; and moreover, when the shoulder joint of the sick person is weak by nature, and the first impression of cauterization seems more safe and mild to me, and from which I use to assemble in a way that saves life.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the child's pain at the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the whole head begins to ache chronically and for a long time, then one should use yernises and pills which are called 'coches', and head-washing with oils and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery as we have described above, it will help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize it slightly as we have described above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After making the fire cautery over each of the patient' head bones as we have described above, and making the cautery at the base which is called 'vassellez', and putting the wind-cups; and align your hand so that you do not see the bone: the pain in this cautery is much greater than in the others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary for the cauterization of the horns to be finer than that of which we make the cautery on the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Dou cautere dou chief
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain and it goes up to the oil, and the head has been purged with medicines that harm, and all this does not help: then let the fire cautery be made according to two ways, that is to say, with water medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery, if it is that you squeeze a bunch of aloes, and peel the bark and wrap it around the head at the place where the pain is, and then make a temple or bandage with it so that you can put the aloe on the skin; and when it has been wrapped for twelve hours, then untie it and dip the aloe in oil, and leave the wound covered for two or three days; then put cotton in oil to wrap it up until it is ready.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointment as long as he is healthy; and if you see that this medicine burns, then take half of what I have written in my book on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The fire cautery if it is according to this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cauterizer with this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it 'clos' because the head is made in the form of a clo or it has I pit of curve, and to the middle there is an little appearance; and place it on the painful place, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that the half of the nail is burned; and remove your hand that the artery does not burn, which is sore, and runs abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in wool, and place it on the place for III days; then I put cotton wet in butter, and then cure the place with ointment as long as he is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this headache with the cauterizer which is called 'cultellare', at all the tip, and keep yourself from covering the artery in this headache that is not old.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	For migraine, if you follow what we have said before in the division of diseases, and don't profit from it, and see that the cauterization with the fire does not suit him at all, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called 'cultellare' until it is white; and sign so on the pain a line of half an inch long, and hold your hand once, and pull out that you do not cover the artery and do not come up to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one bites, and let there be no rustling or spasms in the migraine, and beware of the escape of blood from the artery when it is cut, or when a copement has great fear and more importantly for him who does not know it, and who is students and proven; and leave the work halfway; but I will tell you how to stop the pain when the artery is cut, and I will show you at what point it happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him with fire at the top of his head as well, and cure the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or the chapister for extracting an artery, with the cautery that has II blades; and this cautery is better than that and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	for the pain of ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ears comes from cold, and medicine or other treatments we mentioned in the division do not help, then this cautery which is called "poins" should be used, whose form is:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying "poins" all around the painful ear, or around both ears where the pain is, and moving away a little from the root of the ear then that you have marked the place; and there are X points around each ear; after that, cure the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the mouth torture
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated by cautery is only effective for those that move with fluid, as we have said in the division of illnesses; and not to make any cauterization for the similitudes that come from seborrhea and scales of fish.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this torture of the mouth that moves with fluid, seborrhea, and scalp conditions and gargling, and so on, it is appropriate to make three cauterizations: one in the root of the ear, another a little further down the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery in the part that is healthy, and let it burn for half of the time; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And is the image of the cutler that we have put before you, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives are a little more thick; after care let the place be as I said before, until he is well.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I cut off the head, and I put in it what is called a 'vessel', as we have said before, and a cauterization after the stomach mouth; and let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of limestone
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	This is a disease that requires many years of treatment and gives the patient pills to rub on the brain; after re-shaping the head of the patient, put on the scalp a plaster of mustard which is written or prepared plasters; and this is the way of the cauterization: do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healthy then it is good; and if not, he makes three cauterizations on the top of the head down to the collarbone, and leaves a space between each cauterization of two inches in length; and the surgeon performs them as with others, and when they see that he is shaking, the patient suffers, so one cauterization is made in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others are made on either side, and the surgeon continues to cauterize until he is healthy; and let the cauterizations which are called "olive-color" be made as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	Let the head be washed and cleaned as we have said before; then, with a sharp knife, he makes a cut on the top of the head and around each ear, and one behind and three on the back of the neck; and if it is necessary to do so, and the neck is moist and the patient suffers and becomes worse, then he makes four cauterizations on the spine of the neck; and he leaves them until the second scar is burnt, and he stops; after that, the surgeon continues to treat him until he is healthy, and let the cauterizations which are called "olive-color" be made as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	For the fire cautery, one should only use it on those who are feverish, and first moisten the scalp and perform other treatments we have mentioned in the chapter on treatment when the patient is severe and suffering from heat-based medicines.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	If it is a child who cannot tolerate this, make them gargle and chew, moisten the scalp regularly with good meat; then place the liquid in the middle of the head, and perform the cautery according to what we have said above, and also cauterize on the neck, and on each horn; and if the patient is extremely ill and suffering, perform the cautery as I have said before for those who are paralyzed and have a soft body, on the spine of the back and neck, and make the olive cautery according to the manner that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is blind, then perform the fire cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupt moisture and thick fluid, then lou cauterize partly with the fire cautery as we have said to one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses decline into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then he drinks something to cleanse the brain, according to what has been said in the division about it.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After putting the head of the patient; then make a turban of fine linen, also as a circle, put it on the head; and let the patient sit in a good position and be held fast from all sides; then present the liniment, and rub with old shea butter; and heat the fire moderately, so that he may suffer it; after which empty the circle out through the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient every week once with another good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	And if you see fire cautery, make many punctures all over the cauterization.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This way of cauterizing moistens the skull, increased; and then put cotton wet in wax and in linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When it comes first the eyes by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and do drink to the patient a thing purifying the skull, and warding away all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he has commanded to re-open his skull, and he makes a fire cauterization on the skull, and he makes II cauterizations on the II temples because there is loss of sight in both eyes, or one of them is lost; and cope with all cauterization the veins and arteries that are dislocated, and let the cauterization be long according to the width of the temple; and ward against blood coming out, and if you see too much blood flowing, then stop it with a cloth as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and with cauterization how to stop bleeding; and no one makes cauterization or hemolysis of the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	The two courses of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or remove the arteries that are in appearance of the head outward; and one can see that it is of the cold and phlegmatic excess, then he makes the cauterization that I said at the beginning of the awed descending to the eyes: I cauterize the top, and II cauterizes on the two temples, and II cauterizes where it haters the two bones; and if it is necessary more, if he cauterizes bloodlessly over the socket, then do one small cauterization.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The two courses of tears move inward through the eyes.
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevais; et te warde de l'artere que tu ne la coper.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called “clavis”:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then the cautery of this cautery that is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	for this is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you do two cauteries on the two sorcs as long as the sorcs are; and you leave the hand off until as much as the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	dou poil qui point l’oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No hair has ever turned to oil, nor has it touched the oil, and yet on it have been performed two kinds of cauterization: namely, fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and equal in length, then place the patient on your table; after that, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure which is also like the furrow of the mirror, and this is the beginning of the sign to remove the hairs; then put cotton wet with balm and musk on the oil, and then heat the cautery so that it has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have cauterized the affected area little by little several times, so that the scar is burned at the spot; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retreat, and the hairs stand up to the point where the oil is; then gently lower your hand, and leave it like this for III days, then put cotton soaked in oil in a sack until the burn is healed; after the wound has been treated so that it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper is softened then start again with the cautery in the middle as you did before; and if the hairs are missing, cauterize until the paper returns to its natural position, and is even, and does not touch the hair with the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The medicinal fire cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a shape of parchment in the form of an oak leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each half a cup, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool down again, then spread it on the parchment shapes; and if the disease is only in one oil spot, then one must be applied in one, and also in both, and put cotton soaked in oil in an oven; and the patient's cheek shall be in your healthy hand and place your two fingers on the medicine, and press it little by little each time the patient feels the tingling of the medicine, for he will feel the tingling as well as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	If you have had this for a long time, take the medicine to your mouth.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the blister has passed, lift up the flap, and you will see if the paper is lifted as it was lifted by the fire or by incision; and if so, it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, continue with the medicine on the spot where the blister has not opened, as long as your hairs are even and your wounds clean; then put cotton wetted in vinegar on the sore place, after which cure the sore which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it heals.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you have to take care of your wound with great care so that the medicine does not touch the hairs.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft after that, and the hair pricks into the oil, start again the medicine on that very spot which has become soft from the paper properly, in the same way as you have done before; after curing it until it heals; and this is the form of the blister of the skin:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, according to their nature; and do not therefore adopt for those who are subject to your instruction the same method as is used in this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not benefit them, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your lap; and dip the scalp (in a) cotton soaked in oil or juice of persimmon on oil; then heat the cautery until it is hot; and put the cautery on the scalp as if it were the shape of a feather; together, the point should be applied to one spot, so that you do not burn the skin by accident, but rather as if it were a tent; nevertheless, be careful that it does not burn the hair.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula is opened and treat porriture and dry it; and if it is closed, then work, and firmly treat the bow; after put on the hot cauterizer, and hold your hand at the cauterizer to the part next to the oil from behind, so that your hands do not go crazy; and put the cauterizer in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of cauterization just to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then begin cauterization again, and if you need more, leave it for three days; after put cotton wet in grease, and cure the drying of the infection as long as it is healthy, and if forty days pass and it is not healthy, then put on medicine that corrodes the bone; and treat according to what came out in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And I have a way of cauterizing fistulas, which no one of the ancients said.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Heard it, and found the place; after, put in the narrow thread of which this is the shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I do so in the quantity of one third of a pound; and hold your hand firmly, so that the melted oil does not run to his eye; and it comes that you put the oil to the patient's cotton wetted at the bottom of a jar or a pot: The oil thus artfully applied to the place of the fistula, and the health is restored by a wonderful cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cauterization which we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, then a piece of iron should be administered to the nose, and the fistula brought back to the nose's own place according to what should be done in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	crevasses in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	times have creases in the lips, which are called "hair", and most often in the lips of adults.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these creases as we have said in the divisions, and the cure does not benefit, then heat a small caustice according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it immediately in the creases until it comes out clean; then treat it with the ointment until it is well.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When abscess comes in the root of the throat or the palate or the roots of the teeth, after having made porriture and rot and it becomes a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it does not benefit: then you should have the cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after having opened or pierced the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes up to the bottom of it, and do so once or twice, after treating it as we have said in the treatment, until it is well; and if it is cured in this way, it is good; and if not, then you should uncover the place and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in his chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines and this does not work, then put the head of the sick person in your lap; then heat the cautery until its form comes out in such a way that you put a string on the tooth; and put the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the sick person feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; then release your hand and restart the cautery according to your will; then fill the mouth of the sick person with dirty water, and let it sit for an hour and rinse it thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	In such a way that the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the gums that were softened are dried up, and the moisture that corrupts is dried out.
de la dolor des dens	of tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is coldness or numbness, and medicines do not help, then you have to use two types of cauterization: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	If the cauterization is to be done with fire, make a metal or bronze rod thick enough that the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery so that it cools down as you apply it to the tooth, and hold your hand there until it has cooled; do this often, for the pain will become bearable the next day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in the hurry of this cauterization, and then take it away quickly. And thus is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a wound in the nose that you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the knife:
des scrophules	from the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of cold damp and does not submit to digestion by medicines, then heat the head of the shoulder with fire so that it comes after the form, and has two openings for the fumes to rise from the cauterization on the other side; and place the cautery hot on the abscess once, where it needs to be, until it reaches the root of the abscess; and put cotton wet with butter on it as long as the burning is done; after that cure with oil and poultices until it is well.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moisture prevails over the chin, and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be voided first by giải thuốc giải độc; after that, make cauterization at the root of the throat, and keep yourself from going further than the throat, and dare not cut but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cauterization at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let the cauterization which is called 'clavicle' be the form before us; and heal the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of cold are due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or itching, and it is an old disease, then make him iij cauterizations on the forearm in his veins; and another cauterization at the base of the penis between the testicles; and let the cauterizations which are called 'clavicle' according to the form which is before us said.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, make a fire-cauterization on all the cauterizations that are called "poins" of which the form is as mentioned above in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to XXX, or so around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	Afterward, treat the hole according to what is mentioned above, and let the cauterization be made with three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for those where the cauterization is lighter, for which you make three together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, have the patient lie on his back and on his side; then feel with your right hand the nape, where the joint is dislocated; and if the joint is dislocated inward, make the cauterization that has two nubs as mentioned above in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize him until he pierces it as close to the coast as possible, and comes out with the figure of the cautery together with three cauteries; and because this is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so that the figure of the cauterization are there three cauteries; and the nerve according to the subtility of a tent and it is the shape of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And never place on this nerve because there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After that, place the ring of fire on it; then let the patient rest, and do not move his limbs for a long time until he is well established.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated again, let the following thing happen; then make a cauterization with the thick ring of fire, or a large number of cauteries pierce it.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is dried up, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach there come chills and moisture until it is removed from its color, and are multiplied to him the catharres, and are manners of accustomed cures and he does not benefit, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	Therefore after him do III cauterions I of the cow's milk by the quantity of a two, all cauterions are nailed, and II cauterions later on both sides as long as the form of the cauterions is at III angles, and there is space between them so that they are not joined together when they go on fire; and be the cauterion so perfect that it scorches both parts, and is the form of the cauterions according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize your stomach with a large cautery according to this form; and the one who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by piercing and signing on the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you desire to cut; then cauterize at all the cautery which is called 'point'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the cure of the wound that we had before, as long as he is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Regarding the liver, when it has pain from cold and moisture and strong windiness, as long as it is forcibly removed from its natural composition due to excesses; and the patient is treated for what we have said in the divisions, and it does him no good, unless he becomes sour on his back; and the sign of the incision is three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, removing the hypocondries where the knife of the ombel comes; and leave a space between each cautery of two inches; and let the cautery of the long neck of the torso, and do not press much with your hand at all the cautery; and let it be burned with great heat halfway through; and let the patient lie on his back; and if he cannot, then let him extend his legs, and raise his breasts; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is, then cauterize these cauterices of the cuttle, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all of it, for you would make the whole body dry; and let it come to no more than a bean's eye, for the cautery is very subtle in this place, and it is small to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you can tell whether it is in the parenchyma of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the parenchyma, then feel that the patient feels little pain; but if it is in the capsule, then feel severe pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And then, when this treatment of the blisters has finished, let the patient be careful on his head; and then sign with your finger where the abscess is, and then heat the fire which resembles the root, from which this shape comes:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize I the cautery until the curings be burnt, and come to syphac, until the porreture be all furished; after the cure according to the cure of sweates as long as it be sane; and there is no need but of this cautery use none furishes but those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by which hands these diseases have never been corrupted any time.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	And then it can take hard work, and always I think that we should leave him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the plaudits of pleurisy:
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	For the plaudits of pleurisy: The ancients said that one should make cauterizations with roots of aristolochia, and in a similar way: take a root of aristolochia that is long, the largest you can find, and dry it, and make it also as thick as your two fingers; and soak it in oil, and hold it over the fire, and cauterize between the lobe and the chin, and make four small cauterizations descending into the part which is sore on the beard; and make a cauterization between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly behind a little; and I cauterize emmi the breast, and I another over the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and one along the back from the breast; and do not press your hand, but rather open it widely as when you smell.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And no ancient said that any man use fire cautery resembling a razor, and scrape and put it between the ribs, until it comes to the apex; and leap out of pain, so as we have said in the apex of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear that the patient will die now, or a fistula comes from which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse, as we have said in the division of treatments, and it does not benefit, then they have three ways of fire cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of these three ways, one way is that you make three cauterizations, or four, lining according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the fire cautery of the liver which we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauterization, and let the patient sweat on his back; and another way of cauterization is that you heat the cautery which has two ners, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and place the cautery which is place of the mouse, or where the cut comes from towards the left, and are the elevations which you feel by the touch, according to the length of the body, and the cauterization be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After placing the two wands in fire until the sound of one can be heard from the other side, and then quickly treat with the cautery, and so on. And if you see it, cauterize to the whole with three wands.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure has gotten worse over a long time, and this is true that the other before said cure must be used.
de ydropisie	dyropisie
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery does not suit yropic, except for the way that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the ways we have mentioned in the divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is appropriate that you make four cauterizations around the boude, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the kidney, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place the pis; and let the cauterization be close to the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After remove the fire cautery to go away long-lasting scorching, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hurry, and both intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the fire cautery for the abdomen is the clave that we have before us most frequently; and that for the back is olive-shaped, according to what it is herebefore described.
de l’enfleure des piez	of swelling of the parts
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the parts are swollen in one who is hydropic, and are pale yellow in color, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the index and middle fingers; and gently lift up your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not go too deep in the part, otherwise it would come out white; and make the cauterization according to this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing the fire cautery on both legs up to the tip of the knife; and let the cautery be long, one behind the knee in front and the other behind, between the leg; and leave the cauteries a long time without healing, that the wound goes away; after healing the others as we said.
de la menoison	of the house
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and beneficial qualities remain in the stomach and the intestines are afleboied, and cannot be healed by any means; and you see the patient suffering much and of great strength, so do I make a great fire cautery on the stomach according to what he has talked about before or the cautery of the stomach, circulating; and four cauteries around the navel very finely, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see moisture abundant and the patient suffering, then make fire cautery on his knuckle, and I cautery on each finger, and II small cauteries in the stomach of the great, for the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are at the root, or one or more, and are old and have large cold wet腐敗humors, and are cured as we have said in the divisions, and it does not benefit, then do fire cautery: III on the spine of the back, that which is all outside let it be cut little by little in a triangle, and I cauterize outside the two bowels; and if you think that his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling on the face, then the face let it have a large cautery as said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse at all cauterized clavicle; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	Aftercare until he is healthy again.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	from the charnosity which is called “theloële”
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the charnosity, if it is hot, the fire cautery that seems like a razor, and then put it all ablaze on the treated area; and let it rest as much as your hand can manage so that the cauterization reaches the birth of the vein, from which it will not move; do this once or twice, and if there is more charnosity, cauterize each one as we have said; after treating with beneficial ointments until they are healthy again; and if you cauterize a large area with a large cautery, it will be of greater help.
de plaie mal curee	from a wound that has not been treated well
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will tell you in your place, if it comes to a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no outlet for the vent, and it is inflamed and produces pus and corruption, then you should provide a complete thin paste, and be sure to know exactly how much of the paste is required.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery that seems like a razor, and pouring it into the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and restart the cautery as many times as there is corruption and pus, once or three times, according to the quantity required; and be careful not to damage the nerves that are underneath, and open large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula runs to the belly and intestines, then be careful of these veins, and do not cut them except in their charn, and know that they are not useless; after healing the vein as long as it is healthy, and if the veins have been severed, and the matter has become hard for a long time, then know that the vein is completely healed; and if the matter has not become hard, know that the vein is three-quarters healed, and the bone is corrupted at its root; and thus, as one of these that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When the pain of the kidneys and the great wind comes, and does not take a woman's shape, then it is necessary that you make a cauterization on the kidneys from one side to the other at the clavicle cautery which we have just said; and if we cauterize ourselves in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and greater help will be done.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from fever and moisture, so that the patient retenes urine, then you make a cauterization on the back of the bladder, where the hair of the penis comes out, and one on each side, as long as we do it with a nail; and you make another cauterization behind, where you need to do so; and make the clavicle cautery according to the shape mentioned before.
de la marris	of the mare
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are rotten and delayed in their growth; and when they come, then great pain is felt: so three caustic treatments should be applied around the buttocks, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder, and two treatments lower down the back; and let the treatments be claved, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is farther away than the other when measured together; and the joints are found deep, then you should apply a seemingly circular cautery to the sick person on the hip joint box, and mark before the joint around the box as it turns, so that the box is inside the circle; and if so, apply the treatments like those with which we have cauted the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cautery does not present itself to you, do three cauterizations of the olive-sized granulation, and let the cauterizations be completely done like all the curings; and heal as long as he is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the knee
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When the pain comes in the box of the knee, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is cured of what we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it is appropriate that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills, or other bad-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, make the cauterization; and the manner of the cauterization is according to two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cauterization is according to many manners, of which one is this: that you cauterize on top of the box of the knee three triangular cauterizations according to this form, and make it deep and large, and leave between each cauterization a space the size of two, and let the cauterizations be olive-sized; never do you make a cauterization in the middle on top of the head of the knee, for there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the cautery at the circle that we have said before in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in a different way so that the circles contain all the hip, and all the flesh of the knee is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if the pain extends to the thigh and leg, then make two cauterizations at the place where the patient feels the pain, and one on top of the ankle, two on the left leg; and either make the cauterization with a knife, or burn the flesh of the knee; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or almost there, then cauterize at the spot where he feels the pain, three points or four at the cauterization called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he is working, do more; and if it is known that the pain is coming from the knee toward the thigh, he does a fire cautery with a cut-out or round knife, and you give him good warning in all your cauterizations that you do not let go so much of the cauterization that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more injury and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen many who have done a cauterization on the heel of the foot and left it so long that the leg went completely limp, and the toes as well, and became pierced and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a solution of the belly which he had, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two places together, do a cauterization on each one, according to this way.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said in the cauterization of the hip, so this is the way, make it one large and thick as a thumb knuckle, or a little less, and space between each one the quantity of a nut of peas; and the indentations are on both sides, and they are also like thumbs, and there is one piece of iron well made; and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	And heat it until it is completely red and dry, and then put it on the box of the bad hip, and turn it over the healthy ribs; and cauterize once I cauterize and leave three days; and then make an ointment of butter, and leave the open wound long; after the cure of dressing as long as it is healthy.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	Albucasis says that we use little of this cauterization because of the fear of its regrowth, and few know who use it; but surely it is a good cauterization, which can tolerate it, and where it sticks.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After resting on the chest of the patient who is lying on his back, and quickly put your hand up to the hip; then get between the two circles of hot awl which are heated by fire one pot, and leave it an hour before suffering the pain and heat of the patient.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is true that the burn also happens like fire; and when the burns are passed, take your hand away from the instrument and lift the hip with soft awl, and leave it thus for three days, and put on butter as long as the scorching is white; and let it be for three days to heal; and that one behind will help after the treatment of oils until he is well.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain extends only to the thigh or only to the leg, make the awl hot according to what you have done in the hip more; and this is the way of hot awl, and I have written it or doctor of correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkaline and live chisel, as much of one as of the other, and grind them together, and put them in a nine pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Take a small hole somewhere that the point of one needle can fit through; and place that pot on top of another well-plumbed pot, and put the alkali and chisel and soft water on it, until there are two layers of powder on top; then leave it like this until it has dried up a little water and dust; then take all that water, and pour it over the chisel and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then if it is very wet and has dried out in the preparation of medicinal remedies and other cauterizations; because it does the same work as fire, and with other medicines, where one cauterizes well with honey, acacia, and soap, all these things are mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Gallien us tells a cure wherein one honourable was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and he made much murmur, and said that another cure was not done, and that he was healed all at once when this cure was made, and he bathed himself as it is taught hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he said in this way that you squeeze the green and dry marble, and crush it with a little fat, and put it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it be; and leave it for III hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter or bath as long as his body is a little aroused, and let him enter the bed, and the pain will go away all and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, unless after the evacuation of blood.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And 디아スコ리데스 says that when the sciatic vein is burned with a goat's horn, it helps much; and the cautery must be made in such a way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take another and burn it with oil, and put it on the pit that is between the thumb of the foot and the other which is called the fistula.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards take a dry goat' horn, and hold it in fire until it becomes charcoal, and lay it on the wool, and leave it until it is blackened; and do this again, and never cease to do so as long as you think that it comes to the knee, and the pain ceases; and this way of cauterizing is called "cauterize de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, or from چرور، یا توسط ضربه یا از طریق تخلیه زیاد، یا از شباهت ماده ی سرد گسترش یافته، هیچ یک از این شباهت ها ارزش cauteering ندارند، مگر اینکه آنهایی که از infusions of cold material come.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	He should after that the sick person is voided of foul pills or others, that one does to him on the back, where the pain remains, three lines of two inches long, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and the quantity that the sick can bear; and let be done the cauterization according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, do III cauteries or IIII at the cautery with key according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they have tight back when they stand up and are afraid; and you will find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on top of the others.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this person and you see him heal, if he is cauterized with the cautery of that one according to this form:
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the fire cautery is equally applied to each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, so cauterize inside the spine with the piercing cautery two lines or three, and let the punctures be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	Afterwards, heal the area as much as it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery in gibbosity which is in the spice of nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the joints' pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb, and when the pain comes in pieces, which is called "podagre" properly, and when it is of a cold cause and cannot be cured with medicine, then it is cured with cauterization in this way: make the cautery's juice around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-colored according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if it is necessary for you to hold the foot, then make a fire cautery with all the fire cauteries that are claimed "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then make a fire cautery on each knee III cauterization or IIII of each part, with all the olive cauterization; and if you need more, then do more, but do not hold your hand firmly except for as long as the skin of the cure is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have spoken about in this chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, then make a hole of II lines; and if there is still pain in the two, then make a fire cautery on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the arms or shoulders, then cauterize each part, and govern the patient well and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you do this with good government and you purge the fluid, then you will be healed by God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syph
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anger, and the bile descends as the bowels move, it is new, so that when you look at him, he should not go out that day; and use things that cool his belly, so that the end descends from his belly; after let him sit on his back between your hands, and order him to shave his hair as long as his bile is repaired, and bring it to your feet, and sign a half circle above his body from the back of the hand, and at all times that is similar to half a circle; then heat the cautery in which there is this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	as long as it is white and it pours drops.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then put the balls back in place; and the minister will hold his hand so that they do not turn back; and well operate on the legs of the patient, and put a cloth and an apron on him, and another on his feet that holds his hands; then put the cautery on his ankle at all your hand, and keep it firm and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, begin again another time until you come to the bone; and be careful so that the ball does not slip when you are operating with the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that through this, the patient does not die or suffer any other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you come to the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and for adults as well according to their size; after III days cure the site of the cautery with butter until it is warmed up; after that cure other remedies until he is healthy, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that his bandages be kept in place for a long time, so that the ball does not slip when he wants to go to bed.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is brought to him and changed every four days; and he has good rest, that he works little and guards against too much drinking and eating, and too loud noise; and when he has done this teaching, he is completely cured.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say here after the cure of the cutter in his paste.
de la routure dou ventre	from the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are not getting better, you will see that they no longer grow; you make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and burn it on the third day of the cure; after the cure according to what we have said; and no one of the old ones said that it should be fire-cauterized on three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but the first sign is the place of incision and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and with your hand press all the fire-cauterized part.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain arises in any member, or from a knock or a wound, and this pain persists for a long time, and medicine does not help, then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the cauldron which is called 'poins', and the cauterization according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its virtue, and its location from twists, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If he is healed after the first cauldron, that is good; but if not, then go back and apply another cauldron to that very same spot, for this is the custom: you must apply the cauldron as long as the patient remains unhealed.
de meselerie	of mischief
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The misfortunes are alleviated by cauldron in no way or to a great degree, and most often the disease comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Here is the translation of the text line by line:
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	Et si la melaurie est partout espare; et elle perd manifestement, il convient que tu les cauterises de ces cauteres que nous avons dit ou chef, et un cautere en som lou neis, et deux cauteres sur l'espinee dou col, et six cauteres sur l'espinee dou dos, et un grand sur la crupie et un autre deliez, et deux sur les deux espaules; et deux sur les coutes, et deux sur les tendrons dou pis, et un sur chascune jointure des mains et des pieds, et sur les fosses des mains; et garde-toi des nerfs qui sont sous le derrien calcant, que tu ne les brules; et ne fais jamais aucun cautere sur l'os du poignet, et un autre sur l'os de l'estomac, et un autre sur le foie.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And if the melaria is everywhere sparse; and it loses manifestly, it is necessary that you cauterize them with these cauterizes that we have said at the head, and one cauterize in som lou neis, and two cauterizes on the spine of the neck, and six cauterizes on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crupie and another deliez, and two on the two espaules; and two on the shears, and two on the tendrons of the pis, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the fosses of the hands; and keep away from the nerves that are under the derrien calcant, so you do not burn them; and never do any cauterize on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver. And know that when I make more cauterizes, I make more help, and move it to profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain at the cauterize as those who are healthy do, because the body is already very corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauterization be great and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the way of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	Afterwards, cure with flour of times with honey and other cures as long as he is healthy.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the swelling comes to any member and is cured with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not yet healthy, then do the cauterization on the member according to its greatness and smallness; and let the cauterization be a little bit entering into the flesh of the cure; then treat with ointments until he is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no time is done cauterizing and by hand and by foot and by back, at the exit of the nerve that mute the member, and so if it is a bone; and nevertheless it does not matter if there are no knowledge of the limbs and exits of moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of armor
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the disease called "albaras" is present and the medicine is ineffective, then cauterize slightly with a fire cauldron according to the quantity of the medicine, until the blush is removed and its color changes; then cure it with flour of beans and lentils with oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of lamb and blood of pigeon, each part separately; and mix them all together, and bind them with a bandage, and apply to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure for leprosy by cauterization:
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the leprosy comes at the beginning, and you see it stop, if the cautery is made with a fire cauldron that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the leprosy.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	However, some say that cauterization should also be done in the middle of the leprosy; but I do not find this good, because I fear that it will become ulcers and rotten, and I have never seen it come to anything good; rather, it is better to cauterize all around, with the cauldron called "circle", as we have said in most of the cauldron.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it takes a long time to die, or because of the excess fluid produced by the disease, or because the person is very old and has little blood, or because they are very hungry; then you will see that the disease hastens the death: so cauterize them with small fire in poking; then leave them like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that the whole body is being poked with fire, then heat the fire of this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And put your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" as long as the fire has pierced the pulse, and make such fires that the patient feels heat in some way so that the course of corruption is slowed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After treatment as long as he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The fire cure
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another form of disease that is called "corrosion," and is nothing other than a member's putrefaction, for it gnaws away at the members just as dry fire eats away at dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in its early stages that can be treated with fire, then heat the claves (incisions) small and large, according to what is appropriate for the place where the disease is; after treating with fire all around until it is completely corrupted, and nothing of it remains but only what has been corrupted, then all that is corrupted should be exposed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put oil on the incisions that are hurting from the heat until the burns from the fire have healed over, and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of onions causing fever.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that chaps do not heal, it is good; and if they do not, begin the cauterization on those who are delayed from their places corrupted.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this medication is never cured of the fever by medicine in place of fire cauterization; but nevertheless, fire cauterization is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of fever by medicine in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of onions that come to toes
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	times have passed that the feet by accidents give birth to a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a large, troublesome thing that breaks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	It is to be understood cauterization by fire, and cauterization by hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Cautery with fire: if you heat cautery like a quill of vulture, and is made of good iron at the measure that it can bore the nail from all sides, and has subtle edges; after putting it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand completely around the nail until it comes to its base; and leave it in this way for III days as it begins to move corruption; then he makes a poultice of wild marigolds crushed with string, and leaves the poultice on all night, and the nails will come out and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal the wound by dressing it every day until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if the body is converted by defizers, and many times hurt and cut, it is necessary that you apply hot water to it; and this is a good way: take a wire of iron or gold, or a quill of vulture, and put it on the nail and the pus, that is to say, to rot ulcers; and put the wire on it so that it rots all around, then put a little hot water on it, and hold your hand firmly, and turn your hand many times so that the edge of the wire comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water's way deep until the root; and allow the patient a little of the burning sensation of the hot water for an hour; then leave it, and it will come out completely at all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And so do another one, until you have drained all those who are in the heart, then cure the wounds that cause fury.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some shiver from cold, or from the quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you make four or five cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and a cauterization at the feet, and one over the stomach with olive oil; this will stop the shivering, and will hasten the recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	the pustules that swell
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Once the skin breaks out in pustules that come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it is necessary at the first when they appear that you make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: a fine cauterization with oak bark, which is taken from the fire, or with the root of a long-hair grass, or with a lenticular cauterization.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this way, according to this method, and they cannot grow enquirers before, but the excess is broken which they bring, and they are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	There are often great convulsions of blood from the artery that is cut off at the wound that comes to the surface, or when incising an abscess, or when cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is a very painful thing to stop bleeding.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever there is one [artery], then hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain it as much as the blood stops with your finger, and no drop of it comes out; then take fire-olive [oil] with several small and large drops as much as it is all red; then take I, or a great or a little according to the wound and its place, and hold the cauterizer on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cauterizer on it until the blood stops.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if he seizes a fire when you feel your second pain in the vein, and the cautery is finished, if you take another cautery that are on fire quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other as long as the blood is stopped; and guard against burning the nerve that is delicate, and let no other evil come upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut short from the vein, you can not stop it well yourself if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways we have mentioned: or by cauterizing, or by extraction when it has not yet been treated, or by firmly tying a thread, or by medicines put on it that have power to stop the blood; and bind and stretch it wisely.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer a tight bandage or place burning things on it, or similar things, if it does not benefit, then do not do it.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to anyone and he has neither seen nor heard of medicine, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch them well over the wound and over the vein; and do not move him, but moisten his cold often, so that it is always cold and frozen and hardened and stuck to the wound; and make a scar in front of that from which he needs cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of cures for diseases related to the body's joints and muscles.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases related to fire, or burning medicine, and the pliers and causes and instruments and shapes of cauterization; and I put that ointment on the head of the shoulder until it reaches the tip, and I will go in this chapter through this middle path for those who suffer more lightly than others.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so, since I have begun to speak of this, it is necessary that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first chapter of the cauterizations, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake madness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For in this way people come to their end.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who have destroyed themselves so that they die easily because of the foolishness of their disease, and of the greatness of their wickedness, then we must be afraid of them.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these signs, and he says: "Wait, I am pregnant"; and the disease is mocking.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to these who come to you who have this manner, but put more great courtesy in your honor than in your covetise, and do not open foolishly but carefully of him whom you are certain, and of whom you might have taken and lost; and use divination and indication in the treatment of your sick so that health may be converted; and he who will help to obtain good fame, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and justice, and if you will ask for the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to the one that is before or the chapter of the cauterization, which I have devised from the chief to the tip, so that you may find more easily that of which you will have need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	dou chief plein d’aigue
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	I know that this disease often occurs in infants and when the baby cries too much, the head of the child is drawn tight; and there is never a response to this cause that we know of.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in infants, and all those that I have seen it in, it has brought about death soon after; and for this reason it seems to me that I should be less anxious about the work of this chapter in the treatment of these.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose shoulder was all swollen with moisture, and the head became heavy every day so that it could not be held up; and the moisture was so great that it seemed to me that he would die, and this moisture gathered between the skin and the bone, between the neck and the bone; and the work of this chapter is such that if the moisture gathers between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a wide slit in the head with the knife; and let it be as far apart as we showed you, until the moisture runs; and see here the shape of the splint:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is deeper, and the abscess larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	If the moisture has penetrated the bone, and the signs you see are the creases of the chin overlapping on each side, and the liquid jumps out when you press it with your hand from inside, and does not go back in: then you should make three incisions along the chin according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	Afterwards, remove the bandages and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then clean it with tendons and olive oil, and let the head be dried out equally, and give the patient dry meat to eat from the moisture as the member gets well and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way to incise is that you look at where the apex of the abscess is, and where the sharp edge is; for it is never before; it is never behind; it is never on the right; and it is never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut there where the abscess opens, and its filling with sharp things; for you have the power to do so; and beware that you do not cover the artery; and take care of blood loss, so that the patient dies from blood loss and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When there is a disease that is called "cough" or "pit", and the disease is old, and the remedy of medicines does not benefit, then the following remedy should be used: cauterize with what you will cover the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It is necessary therefore, when you have covered the eyes, that the patient should raise his head; after he rubs his neck with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then take away the patient's collar from all the cloth; then observe where the vein bites, and their roots are behind the ears, and they are well-established; then sign the roots, then cover them both with a spatula with two handles, as long as the cut comes up to the bone, and that of the back of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, remove the spatula from the artery and cover it on top, cutting as well as II do on the back.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is covered, let it continue to rise continually without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to the touch, then measure the quantity of space of III hands, then sign the roots and cut up to the bone; and that which is necessary for the blood to flow out so it is outside so VI c/, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the repletion of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains on the bone without any discharge, if the cut at the absesses is not there, then extract the wound and bind it, and the cure with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of grinding
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the ancient grindstone comes and catarrh is acquired due to moisture in the temples and old scabs and similar things, and it is treated by the methods of medicinal remedies and all that does not benefit him, let us extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have told.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the way to extract them is that the patient makes his hair grow again in his temples, and hears the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is not too tight except in some people who are too cold; and if it is tightened, let the patient be stripped of some sheets, then rub the place with any rough cloth, and raise the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spanimal (an animal-derived substance used as a glue) whereon this form is based:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scorch the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then twist it upwards towards the pincers, and remove all the membranes that are attached to each part; and if the artery is thin, then turn it over to the point of the hook, and then cut off that part according to the quantity of II joints.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then nothing will remain whole or intact.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And twist the blood of the six joints up to three; and if the artery is large, then tie it with two strong threads made from silk, so that bleeding does not occur before the wound closes, and remove the excess between the two threads at that moment as well, and then, if you wish, then cauterize with a knife-edge cautery up to the bone as soon as the joints are cut; and this is the work of the surgeon, if the patient does not have a fever and has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cautery is aid for ending moisture: for this is more great aid against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with dry cotton and place on well-made tents; and when you unseat them, so are cured with dry medicines that they give birth to char, and of tents, until they are healthy; and without a covering of the artery as long as you work, if you hasten to cover it by cautery, or you employ the place of vitriolic acid and strain it in your hand that the clot is strained; and if you do not have this present, put on the place your thumb until the clot is frozen, and raise the place of cold water until the clot stops, and be extracted as it should; and that which is muddled and lighter in extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein sharply from both sides, but let the sharp part be well spread so that it lasts longer in heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too soft, if it retains its heat less.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two tools an inch of space, and then when you have signed with an edge of the two, and you put a sharp instrument burning until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they are distant between the two joints because it is not souded of this fire instrument from all to all; and this is the form of the instrument:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes run down from the veins that are on the top of the head of force, and it does not benefit from the medicine that I make, and you see the face of the patient turn black, and feel or tremble so as to fall; and if they are too soft and moist so that the hair of the papers falls off, and the papers are burned, and scarred by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to have this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the ancient "curing contusions", and that is what you do to the patient who has this disease in his hair or forehead, then make III slashes on the forehead evenly according to its length; and one of the slashes is also like II dows all along the forehead down to the nose, and the others II are on the sides above the bones, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are on the sides above the bones; and remove your hand from the continuation of the two mandibles, and each wound has III units according to the joins; and have laid a piece of sponge and a lot of drapes for it to wipe off the blood, then pour the spatumil from both sides because this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	And from the incision that is supposed to be on the temple up to the second incision; and peel off all the curl that is between the two slashes up to all the medicine that is on the bone, and then do the same thing with the half of the incision up to the other second, and then take away this spatumil firmly.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first cut the instrument that is called "culteller", and it is very well sharpened on one side, and the other is smooth, not sharpened, and this is its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	and set the knife-edge cutting toward the cart at the back, and the edge is smooth towards the bone, and put it in as far as it comes to the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and cover all the vessels that descend from the top at the end of the incision as far as it reaches the back, and then in the middle cut to the other side; and then remove the hair evenly, and press firmly for the blood to come out; and then put a piece of wet cloth in each cut, and put drapes soaked in wine and oil and wax on them, and watch out so that the abscesses don't come out; and on the third day take off the bandages, and apply a lot of cold water, then treat with basilicon ointment made with oil and rosin, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	Let the hairs remain.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Now if at any time a person has a chronic cough and you see the hairs thick and small, and there is a blurring of sight and the papers burn; and the hair falls out, and when it grows back it causes great pain and the patient sneezes; then know that through these accidents those substances and this catarrh do not come from just one vein, and the medicine that is applied is right for this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision at the forehead, and another one wide apart.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And starting from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and make it down to the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves that move when one drinks; and when the bone is exposed, if it is necessary that you dip all the blood in a sponge, and then tie it between the II lips of the incision and put cotton wads, and bandage with damp fabrics dipped in wine and oil, and be careful not to cut an abscess; when it has been pulled out, if it comes that you rub the bone until the char begins to come out, then cure it with things that cause dryness, which cause the char to form.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of flour and three parts of colophony, and make an ointment; and administer it to these wounds to stop the spread of poison.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	the ringing in the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that causes ringing in the ears is one of the four things: grain, beast, mineral stone or similar objects such as iron; seed, as seeds, beans, peas; flowing fluid-like thing, as water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it rings in the ear due to a stone or some other object that does not fit into the ear, and does not stay in place, put the ear to the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, let a little oil of violet or oil of sesame fall on it, then administer extraction; and when the vibration occurs, stop the ringing by putting wafers or wool inside the ear; and raise the ear up.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	At times it comes out strongly with this treatment; and if it does not come out strongly, then the patient is given extraction of fine pustules, from which thus arises the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out strongly with the treatment, that is good; but if not, then extract with small sharp things from the inside of the ear, a bit at a time, and stop up what is outside with soft wax so that it cannot enter with the instrument; then treat forcefully, for many times it comes out forcefully as we have said; and if it does not come out in any way, then take glutinous substance from which the ears are made, and put some in a vessel or something similar, and press the glutinous substance against a stone or something, and treat forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not come out of all these things that we have said, then hurry to split the ear so that it is hot and spasmodic; and the way to do the split is that you first make the sick person from the headache and draw blood according to its virtue, then set the sick person between your hands and turn the ear up, and split a small split in the root of the ear to the fat where it depends; and let the split be like the moon until you come to stone, then the bone according to your power, and suck it into your mouth carefully; and heal until he is well.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is seeds that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a subtle spasmodic injection according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and provide an incision for that seed.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make this cut when you think that the grain is moist due to moisture in the ear, until you have made many of them; then extract them with tweezers and a needle as we said, so that the extractions are controlled.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	Therefore, when a person has a cold in their ear, they should first use a strong expectorant, and widely wrap the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let him go to bed with that ear up where the cold is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	if it bleeds, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	if it bleeds, that's good. If not, take a few drops of his finger tip towards the ear and lightly heat them, and then put one in his ear and saunter on I from his other side, and make another drop of fire on the fire that is in the ear; and do not stop making this drop until all the fluid has gone, and so it has completely gone; and if you see anything, take a bit of wax and bottle up one of the drops in the ear, and the other drop take fire; then make another drop of fire as before until all the fluid is gone. And do this to the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal's tooth, if it is small, like a flea or similar, cure as we have said in the division; but if it is large, apply extractors for extractions, and this is the lightest thing to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, if you treat them as we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then you must look at the ear towards the sun: if there are no worms, apply small extractors, and if there are none, take a thread and see what form it has.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	It is narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And cut the tip of the thread narrowly according to the quantity of the patient's pain, then tie it tightly all around; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey, if they stop up the cotton tube as I said in the stone; and if they do not come out as we have said, if you administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or a treating of distillations; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear to all this instrument, by which is this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And if it is of silver or gold, open a small hole, and above the tube for distillation; and to press the distillation into the instrument of silver very carefully made because you see, and take a razor and wrap the cotton around the tip forward; then pour your oil or juice, and what you want of your medicines in the tube, and the tube is in the ear; then pour into the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly for as long as the oil is distilled or dripping from the ear; and let him feel the medicine inside, and the distillation is I beat at the fire in this way that you distil in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the support of ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who do not have a hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men because of an injury caused by a splinter or a piece of wood falling into the ear, and it never completely goes away unless one can see it clearly; and it never causes any harm, and one can't tell.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	So that it completely goes away if one can't see it, it is a grave remedy in many diseases, and in this case you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the operation apparent, if the hole has completely closed up all this scabs of which this is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be flat and smooth in front and behind all over, so that it doesn't poke the ear; if the hole is caused by a splinter or a piece of wood falling into the ear, if it has caused small scars, and gently wipe it, until the splinter is completely out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the ear is fully formed, then take a sharp and light razor and heat it slightly over fire, and then put the ear ring in.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the pimple that the patient feels pain in his ear, pierce lightly, and be careful not to harm the lobes of the ear; then put a ring in according to its width, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not make it any day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it with rose water and powder it with vitriol broth; and if you see that the ear has escaped, then remember to take out the tent and take another tent moistened with rosin made of rose water and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the pain comes on, dip a sponge and drape in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other remedies that relieve the pain of the headache which are or treating distillations.
de la char des papieres	with paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Cut the roots of the herbs when they are moist and dry, so that you stretch them with tweezers and pins, and then put vinegar on the tips; then place it on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not peeled, then cauterize them with the lenticular fire cautery, and cauterize them after incision waits; and often repeat it, so that nothing stays in its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and never return.
de la gresle	of the root
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Several times come in papers things that seem gresle in its form and its hardness, and for this is called "grandine", and is a group of moisture large in the paper on top and dry it; the work is such: take care if the grandine mutates from one side to another, and it is a light thing to know; cut off then the wide part, then scorch each part lightly, then pick it up with tweezers, and tie it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little into the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the tear is large, sew it up and heal it until it is well; and if it is small, do not use force, for the patch will soon come off again and cause pain.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	If the piercing is large and goes inward towards the ear from above, turn the paper inside out, and fix it with a pin on either side; and if the paper is moved by the incision, do not worry; and when the piercing has been covered, let oil of salt water be applied, and heal the wound where it itches until the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the hair
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	is removed by paper webs from above, and this happens more often in children of no one, and hurts their eyes much, and their tears hasten to their eyes; and so they lie on their faces overnight, and sleep with them, and their eyelids become moist because of the exиня which opens into oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the neck to your ears and feel the pulse run between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method for doing this is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen sheet, and prepare a tent with it in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of pulse that runs between each part, and then put it on him; and press his ears on either side so that the pulse is gathered into the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp knife, making a cut not larger than the wound at the opening of the vein; and make the skin round completely while you feel the pulse; and in several positions the pulse comes out of the cut, according to the shape of a piece of fat white.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take a whole piece of linen cloth between your hands at the back, and turn your hand to the right and to the left as it becomes loose; and be careful not to move in the cut, so that you do not tear all the way down to the oil, lest you blight it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if he does not come out in the beginning of the split, then just a little bit split it lightly until it appears; then extract it as we have said, then wash it with water and salt, and put it on its place, and extract the splints.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such men who grind leaven and put it on top so that the moisture that is delayed is corrupted.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then heal it until it is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to the apothema hot, if the healer of wounds assuages it until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the papers arise hair other than nature, and are wetted, if they hurt the eyes, and cause manners of diseases as usual tears and softens the papers, so that it is a cause of destruction of the hairs; and the healer is according to four ways: either by fire cautery all together, or by medicine water according to this which he is before, or chapistle of cautery, and it is done either by incision and suture, or by razors, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap, and then take the paper roll of oil into your left hand; if it is twisted, it is good; but if not, pour an needle onto all the thread above; and let this be placed at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow out from these hairs, and run the thread up to all the spatulum, from the great tear until the little one; then remove the thread, and place the paper roll a small piece of cotton and cloth, then sign on the paper an image of an ear, like a clove of mirth, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is a need that which has been devised for all; and it is necessary that you sign the paper with an image of an ear, like a clove of mirth, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all. And if there is a need that which has been devised for all; and it is necessary that you sign the paper with an image of an ear, like a clove of mirth, and it is necessary that the image be according to the quantity that you see raise the paper which is devised for all.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut off those who are at the top with small forces evenly according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	If you are unable to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread on it, and wrap it around the shape; and take another thread, cut off a large piece of the thread, and the next fil, cut off a small piece, and join them together evenly; then lift up your hand evenly, and lift up all the skin where you have tied it, as we have told you, then join the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is well; and if an abscess comes to your incision, then calm it with cerot and similar poultices that soothe; and never happens that the hair of the paper are turned: so you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitch in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j'ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li Papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l'un et l'autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de loil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu'il cherra par lui.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound heals slowly, then treat it until it is well; and when the paper has dried, and cannot hold hair anymore, and the shape of the nails you make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of long and wide:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The sutures are such that you squeeze a fine needle, and pour a thread of silk, fine and delicate; then assemble the joints and tie each one together finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order the other thread of silk, fine and delicate, to be cut briefly, and tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your lap; and take care that the sutures are lowered by the sun so that they do not show, for they are delicate and small sutures, then insert the needle into all the hair at the root, and make it pierce the paper quickly as you hold it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the paper, and pour the hair into the paper, if there is one or two or three or more. Then remove your hand until the hair comes out completely from the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	Et si'il est chasse, il est traite; et les poils ne viennent pas avec lui, si tu trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l'oil; adonques si tu trairas la chasse et le fil, et cloye l'oil et le laisse cloy le II jors ou III, tant que les poils s'aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et si les poils sont petits, si acompaigne un poil lonc des chevaulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu'il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.
de la porriture de l’oil	And if he is chased, he is treated; and the hairs do not come with him, if you will spin the tow from the sheep's wool at a distance, so that it comes from the head of the sheep, and then you will see it through the sight of the eye; then if you will spin the tow and the yarn, and harden the oil and leave it hardened for II days or III, so that the hair grows in its place and the curl rises up; and if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair with natural curly hair, and be carried with that which you leave, so that it is lengthen and then let it lie.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	How this disease, which is called "aleacrati", or when the inflammation comes in oil, there are two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly by wound, or by cut, or by cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of treatment in this is that you tear off that wound, and separate the lips from it, and put linen threads inside, and leave it until it is healed; and you must not use for its treatment anything that dries and constricts.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will come back worse than before; but use soft things, such as fenugreek; and water or ale or seed-lin seed that is cooked, and melted castor oil, and wrap a linen cloth around it, and treat it with any of these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure, if you keep it that it does not harden according to the shape that it was before; and those remedies that we have said are strong only after addressing this disease, that it does not return according to the form that it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the oil comes from the lard
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	this disease that is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidental way comes from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things; and the path of the shoulder in it that you press an needle, so that it has double thread, and push it into the lard, and let the thread come out on the left hand side as far as the palm, so that the thread comes out on both shoulders; then put the lard above all the needle, and the cope at the thumb.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et si l'apparence de la papier revient selon ce qui lui convient, c'est bon ; si ce n'est pas le cas, alors prends une rasoir et met-la dans la fente, et retourne la papier, et fais deux fendures ou creux dedans la papier; et soient les têtes des deux fendures des deux angles de l'incision que tu as fait, et soit fait un angle si que quand elles sont assemblées, que l'apparence soit aussi comme l'apparence d'une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis ôte cette charpe, selon la quantité que ses côtes est agus desoz, de ceu qui ensuit la papier, puis ajoute les deux parties désordonnées, et les cout d'un fil de laine; puis le guérir de ce que nous avons dit des médicaments mollifiants, et des tendres, tant qu'il soit sain.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	Et si le malade vient de fendure, ou de couture, ou de cautère, il convient que tu fendes une fente plate à l'écart des poils du patient, et selon ce qui est dit ci-devant ; puis desserre entre les II livres d'une tente, comme je l'ai dit ; et il faut faire l'ouvrage selon la forme de la maladie, car elle est très diverse en forme, et les sages maîtres apparilleront l'outil en fonction de tout son pouvoir pour ramener la figure à sa forme naturelle ; et le malade lui-même, selon ce qui convient d'œuvre et d'instruments en diverses dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	And if the patient comes from a cut, or a stitch, or a cauterization, it is convenient that you make a plain cut out of the hair of the patient, and according to what is said above  ; then loosen between the II books of a tent, as I have said  ; and it is necessary to do the work according to the form of the disease, because it is very diverse in shape, and the master sagacers will apparill the tool according to all its power to bring back the figure to its natural shape  ; and the patient himself, according to what convenes of work and instruments in diverse dispositions.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li Papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l'oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d'un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l'estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l'oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li Papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l'oil aigue salee, et le leve d'aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l'oil une tente de lin, et met sus l'oil laine moillie en abun d'uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu'il soit sanez.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	I know that the nail is of two types: it is nervous and similar to hard syphils, and another type that is not nervous but looks like frozen moisture, which does not hurt when touched with iron and rubbed with ointment, but both types begin to shed tears heavily, and increase little by little until they obscure the entire sight and light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the incision method is such that the patient places his head in the dish, then he opens the nails; and take the paper to your hand, then twist the nail with small double twists, and raise it up; then take a needle, and I put there a hair of horse, or cow, or bull, and thread it strongly; and double the needle point a little and stick it into the nail, and pierce all the nail with the needle, and tie the nail to a thread and raise it up, and peel off at the root the hair that comes out of the sprig and silk to the hair, then cut away all the thin skin that is left, so that by incision the course of tears does not come; and never fasten the nail to the oncene alone, and on a thread, as we have said; then peel off at the root all the hair from which comes the sprig.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l'incision giete en l'oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc'a l'autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu'il i covient tant qu'il soit sanez.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And be careful that the spatula does not touch the raw cloth and tear it, and that the prunella is not pierced; and after the incision pour a little oil of seaweeds, and a string made of litharge, and leave it until the other day; then cure him as much as he can be healthy. And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this nail shape medicine is cured; and they are born as I have told in the division, and if you see them covered, do this oil on the patient, and take the lightweight spatula according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift up the finger gently, and if you see that it thins little by little and the root becomes darker, then distil from your mouth with oil of the crucible made of red dye and sebo, and stop the oil until the next day; then begin the other operation according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes it in the oil, as if it were a hot abscess, then the milk, and first cure the hot abscess until it is healthy, then begin the operation again as before, until it is healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the arm in the oil causes great harm, then let it hang for a while, and take off a little more, so that tears do not come; then distill into red oil, which is made from lead ore.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the horse that was born with a foal on its eye
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Of the horse that was born with a foal on its eye, some men sometimes have a red mare, and cover the prunelle and restrain it with paper and turn it to the back, and seems like a rose of a bristle; and the work is such that the patient puts his head in the sun, then he works the hairs, and twists all those horses with suitable hooks, and holds them firmly; then take the first horse, and go all the way to the razor, and be careful not to rub the oil on the work; and be it an incision of the spatumile that we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one oste the sebel, as the form shows after this chapter; and when the incision is finished and all the horses are osted, then pour the oil of seil broie or you i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, and put on the oil back cotton with abin of uve, so that it is assured of aposteme warm; and if it does not wait anything, and li without shoes you sormonte, and you doubt about warm aposteme, then leave the oil and cure the aposteme of soothing things warm aposteme; and then return to your work until he is healthy, and then do so many horses are ajostee in the oil by this form.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is necessary that you adapt the treatment of each weak oil of the natural way; and of the accidental way in the work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that the members are suffering from this work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the hairs
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	are red, and are covered over the oil, and endure its work and weaken the oil all the time.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is therefore necessary that you first see which oil is affected, and whether it is hot or cold, and there is no other disease but the hair; so let the patient put his head in your lap, then hold those veins as long as possible according to your wisdom, and make the vein double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two oils by degrees according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then let the forces of those veins be gently pulled, and wash the blood hour by hour, until you see them all removed from the oil; and be careful not to cut the tips of the spatulas into the oil, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not burn more than those veins; and when you have done this, let it be distilled into the green and red oil to corrode what is delayed with the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	If you do not have the power to draw all of this out in that hour, then make a paste on the oil from things that calm the pain of the eyes and leave it for some days until the pain is calmed and assured by the abscess being hot, then start again according to this method which is before until he is well; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	I shall name them “arissati” fistulas: when you treat them with fire cautery and medicine as I have said above, and they are not healed, then you must split them down the aposteme, at the place where they must die, and remove all the moisture there is, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see corruption and blackness, then the cure is to take all of the instrument wherewith it is shaped; and it is called “aspre chief”, and made from a sharp object like a file as it is in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the location of the rotten bone, and turn it between your two hands, and press your hand upon it a little so that you know that the corruption is gone; and do this once, then return to the location of drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the leg is stiff, and cannot be moved, and the iron ring is fixed there for forty days, and does not open again and the bad accidents do not come, then know that he is well. If not, then if there is another way than to bring the fistula back to the hole of the nose according to this form: and it is because you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with medicines of strong smell, and when it is uncovered it takes it at once according to this form, and let the iron ring be fixed at three angles, and let the iron be thinned until the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put it on the bone with the iron bar, and keep your hand away from the oil well, then turn it all back until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain because his hand is still on his nose; and when you restore the place of dry medicines, as I have taught you, and when the leg has healed and hardened the bone, if the material goes to the nose, it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the oil issue
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	de l’issue de l’huile
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the breaking of a woven cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Quant disruptions comes in the woven cloth, then open it, and comes like threads of resin, and is seen easily; therefore if you see it covered, the ovraiges are such that you patch with a needle at the root of the part from above until there, then patch another needle where the thread is doubled from the armier part; and let it pierce, and leaves the first needle according to the disposition; then tie one end of the double thread and wrap it around the uvee part, and pulls it tightly, then remove the needle and put it on oil soaked in urine; and let it be until the thread twitches with the uvee, then treat the oil of comforting things until the wound is healed; and never restrict the wound by wrapping a cloth around one part of a circle
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the hairs have a good appearance, then pierce them with a thin needle that comes out perfectly from the oil, and run the moisture of the albinized wax and dry the hairs, and insert it so quickly; then remove it until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bowels of the oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease, which is called "alcunnati," is only a bowels mixed with oil, resembling water descending, and yet it is not water; and the manner of the appearance of this malady is such that you place the patient on a raised bed and upright, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it as much as you see the bowels coming up to the hair; then stop it firmly, and do not descend or move the light, and look at the patient's hair, and if they do not descend, know that it is water, and the descending of the bowels with the oil is done so as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you put the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatule and rub it on the corneal patch in the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal patch and the crown, until the bow is out; and when it comes out, pour into the hot water a sweet oil mixed with honey, or if there is no honey, then cook fenugreek and mix it with honey, and then cure with other cures until he is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	with the oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearance of arrows in division, and what is necessary to pierce; if you work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you put the patient between your hands, away from light because of the sun, and press the oil firmly; then take the paper of the oil with your left hand if the oil is on the left, or with your right hand if the oil is on the right; and then take in your right hand, if the oil is on the left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the oil is on the right; then put the tip of the instrument at the root of the crown by its thickness to a ray in that bright paper of the oil up to the part of the smaller tear, and then turn back your hand so that it pierces into the bright paper of the oil, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of almagda be at its perfect measure of the space which is from the prunelet up to the end of the darkness; and this is the crown of the oil; then you will see the bone in that paper because of the clarity of the corneal patch, and then put the instrument a ray away from the oil.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If he is now awake, then the patient will see before him and the instrument in his oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a little while, and if he is able to stand up again, put the force with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and does not move, then extract the alba легерє тãмãтãмãмãţãмãмãţãмãмãţãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмãмã
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	And then take by the side the oil of spices or another wet in oil with a lot of honey, and bind with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those who are of our time, let us put on the komijn with a lot of honey.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the magda cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because there are some men whose hairs are too hard, so it is that you squeeze the instrument which is called "alberit", from which this form comes:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And so then break the conjunctive completely, and do not go too deeply, but make it thin, and pour on magda as we said; and at the end of the work dress it in the dark coming room, where he sleeps on his back in the dark room; and let him be free of all movement, and tie him according to its disposition for three days; then take off it in that very dark house, and test his sight, and let him see some things, and then put him back after seven days; and it is not necessary that you do this in the hour of the cure or afterwards now, but it is necessary that you prepare this, because he will come suddenly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	As the septimo day comes, you shall loose the oil before the septimo day, and address it to the one who assuages the aposteme; and when it is appeased, if thou loost the sight and putteth on a blindfold for any day, and be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then from the house little by little, and turneth to his case; and knoweth that no disciples must meddle in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And then one came to us who was from the Land of Yrach, who told us that in our land it is done all magically, because it sucks the water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our country, nor have I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	These are the shapes of almagda, so that he who does not know them may see them; and let them be of fine brass.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of this middle subtility be, and behind it in three angles aigu.
de la char sor le neis	for the fire cautery on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Now there are times when they give birth or nas or char different ajusted, so that there are those who seem to be scorpions at the root of the foot; and if there is one of them or he has a char enchaned by foxy color, and if it is char with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these chars which is souef and not enchaned, it is convenient that you make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and operate his nostrils, and pour the oncine on those chars, and deal them with force; because you can hold it at the spatumile subtil agut on one side, as long as you know that that char is all ostee.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains nothing that cannot be covered, if he opens all the subtile and light instruments legierement, so that nothing stays; and if he does not rise up again, or incised in an apoplectic fit or as it should; and if it is apoplectic malignities, if you hurry and cauterize as soon as possible until the sinews are staunched and all the chars are ostee, then pour or birth easily and acutely or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the baby is sick, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healthy; and if moisture does not pass through in this way, know that there is no room for the tool because the bones are crushed: then it is necessary that you put a piece of linen thread, a little thick, and tie it with your hands, and leave some space between each knot or more or less; and let the patient bite the thread with his teeth at his strength, and draw in smelling until it comes out through his nose into the mouth; and many times do this to the child when he goes to school, and it is a light thing for him who does it; then hold the head that comes from the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know which one comes after which in smelling as we do with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Make it as long as you know the new has corrupted the plant, then take the root, wash the blood, and moisten the root with Egyptian unguent, and set it back in place right away; make it three days or more, as long as the unguents corrode whatever is delayed from the plant; and then put a plug of plaster into the nostril for some days until he is well, and if it is necessary to use medicines dried up, do so; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, as one distils oils and medicines into the nostril:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And be of silver or gold, resembling an open lantern, like a plug, and conduct it also; and if you see, make a closed plug, and be the instrument plain for purging the head; and I often hold the head when oil or any liquid is heated.
de la char sor le neis	of the shoulder from the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee "telul", et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu'il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l'oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s'on le tarde a coper tant qu'il soit grans, si pren warde s'il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c'est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostèmes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxi color, et tu vois c'on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	as the newborn is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	It is known that when a solution of continued nature enters one of these cartilage joints, it does so only slightly, for fear in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, let one be carefully considered that, if a wound is fresh at all its sap, and then two lips are tied together with a stitch, and then he is healed as long as he is well; and if the lips are torn on one side or the other, it is necessary that you scrape off all parts of their flesh until they are healed, then tie the two lips together with a stitch, and tighten them, and powder on top of powder from dragon's blood, and incense burned; and put on the powders a piece of plaster of strength or another plaster always, and let it be as it will come out by itself, then cure it with ointment as long as he is well.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The way to stitch: you assemble the solution either with needles, as we said in the abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At home, in the mouth, there is a hard aposteme, resembling grains of sand, small and large; so you should return the lips, and cut each notch, and pick it up with tweezers and cope it in each part; then employ the fire after the application of vitriol, until the wound is dried; and then let it be clean, and cure it from dry things as long as it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the gum char is removed by tweezers, which the old man calls "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold it with pliers, and cope it at its root, and let the blood run or the wound; then put on the fire vitriol, or other restraining and drying powders; and if this gum returns after the incision, and many times happens, so you cope it again, and cauterize: if it does not return again after cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for coping.
des sordens	of disorders
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	No disorders should be placed in the mouth between the teeth, those which are ugly and rough; nor should the teeth be black or yellow and rotten, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; so that you place the sick person between your hands, and his jaws in your palm, and remove the teeth or roots as long as there is no delay; and thus do with black and green, and yellow and other colors, until they are all removed; and know that the teeth need different kinds of tools to be removed, according to what the work requires, because the blade used for removing the teeth has a different shape from the one used between the teeth; and these shapes should be ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you cure the tooth of its pain that you pull it as soon as possible because this should not be done at all; for this is a very high-quality substance up to the point where there is no excuse for not pulling it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Now when the patient is forced to pull, you must be certain about the tooth that needs to be pulled.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain forces the patient, and he believes that it is a good tooth, and he makes it pull the good tooth; but nevertheless the pain does not cease for this, until we have often wanted to do this to these gentlemen; and when you are sure about the tooth that needs to be pulled, then you must scratch around the tooth with a sharp blade very gently from one side to the other, again and again, until it is well loosened, then you tighten the blade very firmly; and be the head of the patient in your lap, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not fall out, take any of these instruments and put them gently inside each part, and move them as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the root is pierced and swollen, you should fill it with gauze where it hurts; and if you hold it taut with forceps so that it does not break when you remove it, and carefully wash around the gum to pull out the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure that you do not break it, and leave a part of it behind, and return to the patient with greater pain because of the root's mischief than from the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be sure that you do not do so as the ignorant doctor does, who often by his haste and impatience breaks any carriage, and does not administer anything but what we have mentioned; but brings about a great disease for the roots to remain, or for the carriage he breaks, as we often wanted; and when the root is pulled, if you wash it with wine or acorn water or vinegar; and if that does not help, if you cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, so that the teeth do not break, are long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you draw the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members so that they do not bend when drawing, and made of good iron, and toothed so that they can hold fast.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root moves when drawing, you must put cotton wet with oil on the jawbone or iij.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	as long as the jaws are soft, for then the pliers that are called "algefri" seem like a tooth; and let them be made like a file inside, for this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots will not come out with all these pliers, you must uncover the jaw completely around the root, and put the instrument called "althali", that is to say a chisel, which is this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be thin and big so that it does not break, and the root jumps out through this, it is good; if not, then help yourself with all the instruments, from which the shapes come hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps oneself with this instrument which has II rings, from which this is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front in the razory of the teeth, and this instrument which seems a pair of large pliers, from which this is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and let this instrument be apart from that which cannot break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtilely choose their own instrument according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are many diseases where the old do not teach instruments for the diversity of them; and if it does not break the cart or other bones, on which it lies, if you seek the instruments that are appropriate, as I have said, and help yourself with gestures, from which this is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be big and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not escape, but he can hold and remove; and then return him his place of medicines fitting for him, and if there is putridity in the bone, and it is small, then the surgeon has all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear to be out of place with respect to the natural position of the jaw, and their shape is ugly, especially in young women, you must know that the root is not in its proper place after the tooth has come out, and it is not in its correct position, and he cannot sew or file them: then cut; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is like a small pick, and which is made of iron obtained from one piece:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cap is cut and cut with your hands for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a file like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the lime where one makes needles; and when the tooth pokes and pokes slightly with the hand lightly, so that it does not move until it chimes; then the plane at the end to any razor, and its handle is too sharp and it bleeds the tongue, so it is necessary to sharpen the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the tooth moves away from the jaw
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the teeth move forward from the jaw, either by percussion or by grinding, and the patient cannot press upon anything that he chews unless he chokes, and you have cured them with restringent medicines, then it is necessary to restrain them with a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot, but gold threads never move; and let the thread be neither too thin nor too thick according to the space between the teeth; and if you notice any gaps between the teeth, take the thread and double it between the two healthy teeth, then insert the threads between the teeth, if there are one or more gaps, until you reach safely the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the wrapping until you reach the part where you started, and hold your hand gently and safely, so that it does not move at all; and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the bones of a bird and fix them with nails, and join them together, and put them between the two teeth, and place them so that they do not cut the tongue; and then leave them in such a tight position as long as it can hold out, and if they fall or the wire breaks, fasten them with another wire; if it holds out and serves in this way for all its length, and this is the form of the bones and the shape of the joining of the two healthy teeth, and the two molars, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	Then if the tooth breaks, put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and no one who is not skilled and patient should attempt this, and never make the shape of a tooth from the bone of a vulture, and put it back in its place where it has fallen short, and fasten it as we have described, and it will hold out and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of copper the rings of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No times is the ring which comes from the tongue or nature, that he does not thus; or by accident of a seared sore; and the ovraiges are such that you open the mouth of the sick person, and have his head in your hand, and hold his tongue; then copper the nerve on the side, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is pain or no, and this is of a sudden wound, then bite the ring and copper the nerve; and guard that the cut does not become too complete, for the artery which lies under. And when you have done so, then raise the water rose and thus, or cold water, and then put the tongue on a piece of linen; and wrap it around the sick person every night, so that the ring cannot harden.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the pain comes, let it be put on the vitriolic, and if it does not go away, let it be cauterized with the slow cautery, which is good for that; then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see a small red or black or hard spot that the patient feels but does not touch, for it is leprosy; and if it turns towards blenchor and there is moisture, then dip it in onion juice, and wipe it with a thin sponge, and deliver it from one side to the other; and if it does not go away to your ovraige, put vitriolic on it until it is dried up, and then return it to your ovraige as long as you draw it all out; then raise it up from there and from here, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	of the throat come forth from within what are called “goads”, and they are called properly the II amandres; and when you cure them, if as we have said in the division, they are not healed, let it be careful: if this is an abscess of small size and red color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	If it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron either for fear of blood loss; but leave it alone until it has died down, then you will take it away, or else it will burst on its own; and if it is a pale color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument to cover it over, but first see that the abscess is warm and calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then you shall set the sick person before the sun, and his shoulders be in your care, and he opens his mouth and puts his hands together between his teeth, and presses the tongue all over the instrument, so that this is the form; and it should be of silver or gold as well as our knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And press the tongue to all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if take the knife and put it in the amber, and treat it above you can; and do not treat any threads with it, then the cap to the instrument, where there is the form, which seems strong; and yet the chiefs are curved, and one place another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or a hammer:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, take the cap with pliers, where there is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And be two holes on either side; and when you have kopë one of the amber, if kopë the other according to the same way, and then cut with a sharp knife, gargle the patient with hot water, and cool and easily, and if there is no blood coming out, then gargle the patient with water or cooked apple cider or oak leaves, and similar things, until the wound has stopped bleeding; then care for him until he is well; and do not cut in the throat any other abscesses than the two amber, if they are kopë like them.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I medicated a woman with an abscess that was located within her throat, which is to say a small-sized abscess; and I had it well sealed up the whole way down her throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passageway that was stopped up, nor could she eat or drink, and she would have died if she had delayed for even another day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so high that it had been misaligned by two rain-sized passages through which the patient had breathed.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I then hastened, and inserted an ounce into one of the two passages through which she had breathed, and then pressed hard, and inserted a large portion of a bow; then refitted another in the other passage where the abscess was located, and pressed her tongue; after that I inserted the ounce into the abscesses, and only let out a little blood; and so the passage in her throat became unblocked, and she began to drink and drink again, and did not stop cutting at the abscess for a long time; and the abscesses refilled with pus, and filled the space that I had left empty, until it got very big; then I inserted an ounce into it, and cauterized it within her throat: so she stopped growing; and I left those parts, and only God knows what happened to them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the pain comes from the eye, and it goes away and gets far away, then it is called "transverse"; and if it is large and round, then it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the healing does not benefit, and you see that the eye apostemes are pacified, and they are thin, then you should cut them out; and the one that is round and assembled and is not far away; and it is bloody or of a reddish color or black, then you should avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger with the eye disease.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So then, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, of its blueness and remoteness, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue to the instrument which we have mentioned above; then insert the needle into the eye, and twist it, and cut with two tools that I have said in the incision of the two mandibles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cover more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more, it will hurt the voice and the word; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two mandrels, and cure until it is healthy.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear about covering, then you must use fire cautery on the sensitive parts.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the technique of fire cautery is sharp and piercing.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put his head in your lap, and then press the language on the instrument that we have said or fire cautery, and bind with sharp steel, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and by using the movement of this instrument, from which there is this form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the head have a hairline or a hole into which to put the medicine, as with a spoon, and place the instrument on all the medicine on the uvula; and let the patient lie on his side so that saliva and mucus run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not go down the throat and cause pain; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the uvula for half an hour, until you see it darken and the medicine's effects subside; and if you need to, dip a cotton swab in the medicine and bottle it up on any instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton wrapped around the uvula, as long as the cotton dries out; and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and clean the mouth with water, and gargle until it is healthy.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than the incision, except for the cauterizing. If it is cured by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and ysop and oreganus and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and put them all into a pot or some of them in a pot, and pour it easily and make it boil; and the pot can be very well glazed with strong earth, and put the instrument under it according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	It should be of silver or gold, and one of the shoulders must be put in the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises from the vein through the cannula as long as the vein is constricted; after it starts again repeatedly until the vein dries up, and be careful not to do this at the beginning of the arrival of the abscess, for many things have happened; and don't do this but at the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, then take a dog's tooth and insert it into the patient's mouth at the base of the tongue so that his throat does not get too hot; for the dog's tooth does not make the vapor very hot in the mouth, and this is good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Several times a lump of bone or spine of fish, or nothing, will come out; so you must take what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can feel the thing; and if it does not open for you and is pushed back into the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit in such a way that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps it will vomit up; or the patient will swallow an sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to it, and then drink it down; and when it comes to the place, if it becomes hard, then pull it hard; and if it does not come out hard from what we have said, then take an instrument of plunger according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu'il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l'epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l'os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l'estrument, por ceu qu'il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l'estrument igalment, tant qu'elle soit fuer.
de la sansue de la gorge	And be the instrument curved to the tongue so that it can enter the throat more easily, and lift the tongue high; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, that it does not come to the tongue, nor does it push the bone inside; and be sure that the patient swallows the instrument, for as long as he swallows, he should move or what is happening there; if the drink goes down, or he pulls the instrument back equally, as far as it goes.
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	So be the medicine of the throat, as I said in the division, in the cure of medicines; and when this does not benefit, then look at the throat of the patient to the sun, then you press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, if it trails a tiny hook, or sharp claws that match this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if he doesn't respond, take a dog's chain, and pour it down the throat of the patient, then boil or simmer the blood of the dog, and make this happen often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is turning blue every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full bucket of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in slowly, and move it with his hand often; and if soon after drinking the blood feels sharp, then cut.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it doesn't respond as we've said, then smoke the patient with arsenic, using the instrument I mentioned in the chapter on smoking with a fume bag; do this many times, because it will eventually stop choking.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d'un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l'estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n'en isse mie, mais viegne jusc'a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s'elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d'aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu'elle isse fuer par cet governement.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument is such that you can treat the throat, if you can see it, resembling pliers bent for entering the throat; and has the appearance of a carezza's beak, and has sharpness of lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the capsules of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearance of the abscess capsules, as described in this text following various chapters of this book, and their diversity are due to two main factors: one is their shape, the other is the moisture they contain.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	The second type are those where the location is affected.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Because the abscess at the top is different from that at the bottom, and the abscess at the charn (the jaw) is different from that at the joints, each has its own characteristics in terms of appearance.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	If an abscess does not need to be pierced as it is not causing pain, then it should not be pierced at all; but if there is pain and it is a specific type of abscess that needs to be pierced when it is full, otherwise it will not be cured. For example, an abscess in the jaw joint.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses arise from the joints, and are left until they putrefy, there is a risk that the ligament and nerve of the joint may rot, which causes contracture in the limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	If the abscess is on the main limb, and if you delay perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main limb; or if it is on the fundament, let it be pierced in such a way that it does not rot completely, and so that it does not break out inside, and come to a fistula; and cannot heal very well.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the right time for perforating the abscess that is dead according to completion, and it is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the decrease of pain and redness, and the sharp edge of the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and it is right that you should make the perforation where the abscess opens most deeply; and let the perforation run long along the neck, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal, where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In cases where they bleed, by what member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the flesh, if it is necessary that you leave the piercing until it is confirmed in the completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, if you prolong the course of the venoms from it, and there is much dirt; and by chance it hardens the lips and deepens its pit.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to which the members have need.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must bring small abscesses, small perforations; and in large abscesses, large perforations, and many splits according to the appearance of their size; and if there are such that they need to be chevered, and covered; when they have become as soft as cloth, and are numb, do so as you do with blisters: and if there are any that are split in three places, and if there are any that are kopé like the leaf of mirth, as if they were abscesses of the angles; and if there are any that are made into a round size, and other sizes and a semblant copée.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Those who do not have a head, like an abscess on the surface, it is necessary that you pierce it clearly; and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has a large amount of pus, and you pierce it, if you do not remove all the pus at that time, but remove some part of it; then stop the abscess until the next day, then remove nothing more; repeat this many times with great care, until the pus is completely removed; but if the patient has little strength, or a woman carrying, or small children, or old people who are decrepit.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Use caution with this salve, and when you cut your tonsils, if the wound is clean, and look to see if the tonsil is small; and if it is a simple tonsil, then apply cotton wicks or old linen; and if it is a large tonsil, and there are many holes, then put wicks in each one so that they touch each other; and if you have cut a piece of skin out of the tonsil, and wrapped it around, then fill it with dry cotton or flax wool without moisture, and leave it like that for three days; then clean the bone, and treat the wound with ointment until it is well.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is blood loss with the incision, then apply cold water and quickly, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et s'il persiste dans cette fièvre, il doit être conseillé et soigné, et les poudres dont je parle dans ce livre doivent être mises sur ses membres alors que sa peau est rouge; et s'il est atteint d'une maladie, et la peau de son membre est nerveuse, sachez que vous devez étendre des draps humides en vin et en huile chaude sur vos vêtements et votre tente; et s'il est dans un état d'inaction, et sa peau est grasse, vous devez étendre des draps humides en eau et en huile, ou en vin et en huile froide pendant trois jours, comme nous l'avons dit; puis nettoyez la plaie et soignez-la comme il se doit jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And so it is necessary that he be recognized universally in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the ointment.
des soros	of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	or the little abscesses come out, and are handled so that they become threads, also like the joint of a thread, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	there are some that are fat and such that they have moisture as well as feathers; and there are some that are hard and rocky at the cutting, and there is no doubt that the artery does not do contrary.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist so that you experience with all the instrument which is called "entrismoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, if it goes up long way.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is empty, if he scorches nothing, leaving the hair that contains the moisture, for it returns immediately when left alone; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, in water and linen, and employ the wound, and leave it until the next day; and heal those who have been delayed with a nit.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And so, let us begin with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, as long as you know that it does not dry out at night; then heal the wound with ointment that is suitable, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess persists for a long time, following this form, then cut it off; and pour your vinegar on it, and scorch it all over, and put all your treatment on the skin where it is; and if the artery hurts you, do as I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also make of the abscess if it is bony, and of the cutting and curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut on the bony abscess and moisten it, for it will be lighter in weight, because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or sores do not have moisture, and those that I broke with an old woman's staff; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, sharp, and bleached, and could not break it; and if any had done so, they would also have made a wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head, let those who come from the children and from the roots of the ears be opened as long as possible without taking them out completely, and treat them as required.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times an abscess comes to the neck, and it heals itself, and it leaves scars, and it never comes elsewhere or gets dry, and it is stinky, and it becomes infected.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly inside its rib cage, as the lump and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Of those that are of good disposition at the back, and have the color of the flesh, and do not move from one part to another, nor are they deep; if you should cut them with an instrument, and burn them from each side, and if you need to cut off the two lips, as we have said in the chapter of abscesses on the head; and do it little by little, and be sure that you don't hit the nerve or open a vein, nor are they very deep so that the hand does not escape, nor look too far forward, lest you hit something that you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work on it, put vitriol in the wound or some powder that constricts blood, and extract the wound; and leave it until the abscesses have calmed down and the wound has softened, and then start to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has calmed, if you return to your work, until you have finished it; then, with your index finger, see if there are any small sores, and cut them and clean them out.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a lot of vein at the root of the scrofula, it only makes sense that you cut this scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it hang, without doing any harm; then cover the wound with old linen dipped in Egyptian ointment, then bandage it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound and sew them up, so that there is no delay because of its abundance due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is necessary that you listen to cover the root of it, and extract firmly, and sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have an abundance, pierce them so that they die; and pierce them like this before mentioned, in depending, then cover with care and similar things, so that they corrupt those who are delayed by corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then heal it with ointment, keeping it clean.
de squinance	from squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old said and spoke about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw it done in our land, and it is the script of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	A those who have squint, it is necessary that the slit in the throat which is called the "epiglottis" be removed; and do not seek help from anyone, for all the veins and the blood of the patient are at those who have a hot abscess in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the patient is in the hole of the vein, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis so that the strangle which comes from the constriction does not occur.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is therefore necessary, when we want to split the epiglottis, that we split it with III circles or IIII a small slit through, between II circles or by the quantity of the slit of the syringe, not in the cartilage; and these are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis so that there is no vessel, and the blade is long from there.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is afraid, then it is necessary that he extends the skin of the throat to all its length, and split the flesh as long as it comes to the chin; and avoid the blood vessels if you see none, and then apply the medicine as we have said; and it is shown by the section of the vein that jumps out by the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed by which one doubts about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound on the flesh, and all the coast is under the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce blood, until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says: Don't do this as long as the throat is completely closed up, and the patient is judged to be dead, and the deficiency makes it worse.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	And then touch on the epiglottis lest the patient cannot breathe and thus is saved from death; and for this command the senior person to leave the wound open until the severity of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four; and then he commands that the wound be sewn up and cured, until it is cured. And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young woman took a knife and put it in her throat, and she also cut some of the windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and I found her also dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and I found the blood which was issuing from it, and I am sure that she had not cut a vein or an artery but rather the throat, and her breath was coming out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened and sewed the wound, and healed it until it was well; and there came to the damsel nothing but she was red in the face, and returned after her condition; so I said that in the making of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	The aposteme is called "gastric hernia", and is a large apostema of a yellow color, and is very common in women; it has two manners: natural and accidental; there is no mechanism for the latter.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one is according to two manners: one seems like fat us, and the other manner seems like an apostema that comes from us of the artery; and there is fear, and it does not at all serve to operate unless in the small one, and test and search everything intramuscularly: if you find it as I said, like fat, and cannot at all do anything, then cut it well, and treat it as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	Our
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	There are many ways to describe ourselves, which I will now do; and it is necessary that I show the distinction between us and our functions.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that a fever is a hot and fiery condition, until the sweating has passed and the heat has been driven out; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the right treatment, our body no longer has fever, heat, or pain; it is clean and healthy, and begins to resemble a ram, and becomes fattened; and are according to their appearances, whether they are fat, or dry, and of various colors as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to treat the body, you must first test and question all the instruments that are called "entromessoire", according to what their shape comes or the paste that is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for probing abscesses is that you press or more moistly place the probe in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you feel that the instrument has entered completely, then, depending on the size of the abscess; then remove the probed instrument, and take care not to stretch it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	And if the moist correans, that it be colored, then do so with this in the other abscesses; and if after the probed instrument does not become moist, know that it is thick, so probe it in a cross manner, and take it with pliers, and skin it lightly from each side, and watch the bag or where it lies, so you pull it out healthy with the nut; and if you cannot pull it out healthy, then pull it out by pieces so that nothing remains there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	Car s'il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s'il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d'aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d'autres cures tant qu'il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and so the cauterized batans are opposite to you or other if you hurry and place the vitriolic paste, and leave it there II days or III, until the wound pus, and rest the blood-letting of the sanch; then return to the pot what was delayed with the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	See here the shapes of the instruments that are inserted, and they are of 3 manners: large and small and very small; and there are 3 quarters which are called "albaret", and I which is called "breb", and there are also 3 manners: large, small, and very small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula; and also like the needles with which we cut sorcerers, and they are of yellow brass, or iron, or silver, and they move those that are yellow, and they are more proven by black lead to encircle the borings of fistula; and they are of 3 manners: large, small, and very small, according to the quantity of the largeness of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the horns are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if to horns that have two curls of three ways also; and if to horns that have three curls, and are also of three ways; and if to horns that have two curls, and horns of a single curl only, and are also of three ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The forms of the horns are of many kinds, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if to horns that have two curls of three ways also; and if to horns that have three curls, and are also of three ways; and if to horns that have two curls, and horns of a single curl only, and are also of three ways; and all these are necessary in their places.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it no time to the place which is healthy for coping with veins, and arteries, and never again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Never again do they swell the breasts of some men when they become corrupted, as if they were breasts of a woman; and they stay ugly and swollen, and who wants to heal them, if it should be according to this great form from this line: b. until g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scorch the fat, and employ the medicine by burning it in a cauldron, then join the two lips of the wound to sew them together, and heal it until it is healed; and if the breast drains down, and is moistened with its great size as if it were a woman's, if you make it into two ribs on top, by two apparent gaps; so that one holds onto the other at the end of one and the end of the other, so that the largest line includes the smallest according to this form, from this line: b. until g.; then scorch the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and you will apply what we have said about sewing and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made, so that the patient does not rest, or because of the discharge of blood, then you should fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it drains the remnant and the fat, then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of the heels
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	The pustules that come from heel-spurs are handled in the same way as hard scrofula with ribs, and if there is moisture in them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this shape, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowels that are in the abscess are emptied, then fill the wound with cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment from now on until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like scrofula, then cut it as we have said in cutting scrofula, and if there is pus in the wound, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn together above it, then many abscesses form, and so do escaped veins and abscesses; and if you know where the artery is, then let the abscesses be long and perfect; and when you feel them with your hands, then feel the extraction; and if it is for a vein, then let it go away gradually; and it is foolish to stop up this abscess, and more so when it is sewn together with nails and hooks and where the collar and mouth of others are, and they are very big.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the artery is cut, and the skin is sewn together above it, then many abscesses form, and so do escaped veins and abscesses; and if you know where the artery is, then let the abscesses be long and perfect; and when you feel them with your hands, then feel the extraction; and if it is for a vein, then let it go away gradually; and it is foolish to stop up this abscess, and more so when it is sewn together with nails and hooks and where the collar and mouth of others are, and they are very big.
des apostemes des ners	of the nerves of the neck
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	So too do the nerves come from the artery and the vein, they come to the nerves when they are torn, or by too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with the shoulders and arms and in all their joints, and it is a painful apoplexy, and its color seems to be the color of the flesh, and it is in many states without pain; and when it is stretched out it feels good, and does not feel good all over, neither going forward nor backward, nor up nor down, and the one who is in the joints does not fit well with iron: perhaps there will be a contraction; and the skin at the forehead or at the top of the head seems to the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the apoplexy is small, if it has a spasm, and holds it by its root; and if it is big, if it hangs on the neck, and the skin is scorched, then break the bone and join the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	the large bellies hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No times happens in bellies and ne other part thelul, and is a disease that is called "fungus" by the appearance of bread, and is the subtle root, and the big chiez; and there are small and many large ones; and I saw a man who had II or two bellies which were more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had little roots, and they were cut short, and they ran together moist.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I chopped them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI Z., and the ovraiges in l'incision so that you see that the patient is moist, and the color of the artole is blainche and moist and subtil root; if cope to the fire spatumile wide, and be in your presence cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess with a crust, and I will come to treat the leprosy which follows.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the wound is healed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When the appearance of the wound comes by fire cautery, either because of a scar or a cut on the skin, and it is on the belly and there are some boils, as it happens in other wounds, or because of blood flowing from a vein or artery according to what is before, or due to wind; and if it is because of the wound of the skin and by the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the flesh, and this is a light thing without pain, and opens with different issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is because of the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it towards his two legs so that it returns, and then comes back again, and perhaps if it is stuck, and enlarges much at the entrance to the basin and by strong work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, then this is a light thing, and open well when you press it against your hand, do not hold back; and if it is due to blood, so open by these signs the thick and hard abscesses, and are inserted according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft at the touch, and the openings are such that you look at its appearance it is due to the blood of the artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If you should leave the cure.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you before, or chapistle abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is for the intestine or loins, then order the patient to wet his hair, and be spread out straight, then seal it all around the bouillonne; then order it to flow slowly between your hands, then bring it around to the place you have marked at the top of the spine; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a piece of strong silk rope, and leave it in place; then bring half of the abscess up above the rope, and press down with your index finger, and feel for the intestine; if you find it caught on the rope, let it go, and press the intestine at the far end; and if the artery or vein is causing trouble, so go below, and come back to your opening and take three needles, and stick them into the flesh, and stick them up above the three needles, and bring the excess with you; then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place where it has festered until it is rotten, and cut off the dead flesh by itself; or, when you see it become thin and rotten, then cure it of what it needs, and cut off the abscess as we have said; and remove the blood or moisture that you find, then cure the place from what it needs, and seal it up.
dou chancre	Of the sore of the leg
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	Of the sore of the leg: We have spoken in the division about the appearance of the wound that is called "chancre," and how it must be treated with medicine, and how to avoid treating it with iron; and we say that the chancre invades the limb, and requires great care in its cure, and the old man says that when there is a sore at the root or at the nipple, and in similar places, it must all be cut away when it is still small; and when it is large and old, neither you nor anyone else will ever cure it, for I have never seen one heal.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the incisions, when they are in place and can be cut, as we have said, are that you purge any time the disease of black blood; then make him well if he has a manifest eruption, then afire the disease well to do the incision; then pour on your onions or chancre, and the hair of all parts, and the bone of all parts without leaving anything; and let the blood run freely, and squeeze the place in your hand or in any thing, and if it runs against the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the stump is dry; then cure him with other cures until he is well.
de ydropisie	about dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	about dropsy
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	and cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	and cut in two parts. Trim the hair at the point and never cut so deeply that you reach the intestines when you insert the knife, and do not injure it; then look to see if the dropsy is located towards the intestines: if it is due to liver disease, you will make a cut on the left of the iliac bone; and if it is due to bile, you will make a cut on the right, and should not allow the patient to lie on the cut that the excesses do not flow into the weak place; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and squeeze, and put your hand on all the spatumile according to the quantity of a thumb or more, as you would scrape when peeling a carrot to the quantity of an inch or so, then pierce the syfac until the spatumile comes out at the bottom, and this is the channel for the water, then take the instrument away, and there is the shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is like a silver dog with a slight hole in the middle; and it is made of light bronze or copper, and has one small hole on one side, three holes on another side, two on another side, and one on another; and the head is cut off so as to resemble a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the scribes cut with a feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	And at the top of the incision is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it pours immediately on the instrument; empty then half or a third part, because if you empty more than it is necessary in this hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he will grope or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the sick and his pulses mean; then hold the instrument and let the water stand for a while that is stopped up by the leech, of which I have spoken, so that you pierce it in this way; then begin again the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffer and hold a little quantity of water; do not repeat this any day, and keep yourself from foolishness until he stops but a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the disease, and you leave it with much water, and if the cure of the grave or the sand is hot, and by much sweat or bath and in the sun, and if it turns black from drinking; and the cure of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterizes on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after extraction of water, as I have said above.
de l’estopement de la verge	the constriction of the throat
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	There is no child born who does not have a foreskin, or if the foreskin is small, or if it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it comes to such a point that it cannot pierce the smallest delicate sperm according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then take a small foreskin of skin and string, tie it and keep it for three days or four, and when he needs to urinate, if the foreskin is still tight, let him urinate and then put it back; and perhaps he will not notice anything, because the urine that comes out is strong and does not leave his foreskin closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nous avons dit, si s'eslargera.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose hernia is not in its usual place are disfigured, because there is no one who has a hernia at the root of the scrotum; for they cannot urinate unless they raise their scrotum upward; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot come out as far as the anus, and that is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the procedure for this hernia is that the patient lies down on his back, and then the root of the scrotum and the penis are as big as a feather; so that if the hernia breaks open, it breaks open in the middle, as it should; and you must guard against the discharge of blood, which often comes, and if it does come, stop the bleeding of this one, and heal the wound until it is well.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times there is a painful swelling in the penis, and it has an ugly appearance; and some are malignant and others not. So you should squeeze them with delicate hands, and cut and clean them all, then put cotton wet with Egyptian ointment on them; then cure them with diafinicon until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the swelling is malignant, of pus and filth, you should apply fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the swelling is in the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, you should first remove the part that is inside; and when it is closed, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, unless the head of the penis is not completely closed, so that there is black and corruption in his penis and scrotum; you should cut off everything that is black and corrupted, then put on a plaster made of honey and flour, which has been made from pomegranate skin and seeds, and treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if the blood flow occurs, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if the blood flow occurs, then administer the lunar cautery according to this form: For healing of circumcised men, it is necessary that you burn with fire the foreskin of the penis, and pee on it; and when the hair has grown at the root of the penis, which has occurred because of a wound or an abscess, then you must carefully peel off the hair with a razor, until the skin is clean; and if this is difficult to say, then you should burn it with fire with a sharp instrument from the top of the penis and the skin, and then carefully peel them off, and place a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water on it, so that it does not grow again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an unnecessary procedure if done for other reasons; however, when we perform this operation of our own will, and specifically on infants, it is necessary to do so with the best technique and in the most light-hearted manner for their benefit.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old people did not speak about circumcisio of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have only obtained this knowledge through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen most of the masters and skilled men who perform circumcision between the teeth and the jaw, and all kinds of novacules; so it is that the knife is sharp because there are two blades, and by chance if one of them slips over the other, it will cause great harm.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	And if it falls back into place, the pain is doubled, and the cleaning from the tooth is not certain; and by chance the nail escapes the knife, and ruins the work, and often happens that there is no need for cleaning, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification that is done with force on all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as much above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you squeeze your hand, if you cut it evenly all around; but the thread should be well wrapped around the leather; and let the mode of the first work be that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you do not force the thread tightly between the verge and your hand, and then allow it to relax in all the ways that you can; then make it stretch straight between your hands, and pull the forces between your hands or your toes so that the child cannot see them, nor any of the instruments; then blow on your hand and stroke or knead it, and turn it upwards as far as the knot of the verge is; then purify it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie the knot with a double thread, then tie it to the thong and to the little finger, and wrap it around the two threads, then let it hang down neatly until the next day, and cure it with another cure as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of force for cleaning is this: the two shoulders be soft and be cut, and be the shoulders also very long as the hand always evenly:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of cleaning is when the cure within escapes from the incision; so you must hold it with your nail, so that the edge makes an abscess, and equally, and if you cannot hold it in your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then cut it off.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	If it has passed three days and that which is cut off by the verge is swollen, if you leave the pustule of the scar to dry up slightly and then peel it lightly; if you can move it so, and keep it away from the part of the penis, it will not harm you.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat the head of the matter that has a wound powder, which we have said to treat with powders, and if the cure goes up, it will not harm; treat it as we have said until it is well.
dou retenement de l’urine	how to retain urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	retaining urine
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	Et the manner of the issue of the urine is that thou takest a double thread, and bind at the head with wool or cotton, and bottle the head with the thread within the syringe; and cover the superfluity of the wool and bottle it up to the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with oil or butter and honey, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the penis with moist oil and olive oil and water; then put the syringe lightly into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then double the penis upside down; then bottle the syringe before until the bladder, and let the urine come up until the void thing, and this is not done according to this order but that which li conduis or she vait is twisted; then are the thread to all the wool tied and tied, and the urine follows the wool, then draw it out, and make the urine run; and recommenceth the syringe as long as the bladder is voided and the patient is eased.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blisters or sores come to the bladder, or it is infected, and you see water and medicine distilling there, so do all the instruments that are called "clepsydras", and this is their form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three perforations: two from one part and one from another, as you see; and the hair of the scrotum by which the medicine drips is such that it stops well the urine without addition, so that you can draw out the moisture, and pour when necessary; and when you see your medicines moving in the bladder, put the tip of the catheter into the moisture, and pour while moving it; if you pour the moisture into the catheter, and then strongly move it; if it will enter the moisture and go to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is clistere: it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenantment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.
de la piere	from stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already spoken about the methods of treatment for stone and extraction together in medicines; and I said about the difference between stone in the kidney and all the signs, and how one must act regarding the stone; and concerning the bladder and penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and I begin to treat the patient by grinding his penis, and many times, then it hardens; and its roots are destroyed; and the healing is lighter for children up to the age of four, and very difficult for the elderly, and between middle age and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, if it is necessary first to purify the patient with a enema, in order to draw out all the matter that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it is not often necessary to seek the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and move them up and down so that the stone comes out to perfection from the bladder, and does not come out of its own accord; then make him sit between your hands, and his legs be drawn back, so that the bladder hangs down; then feel for it and touch it inside; if you feel the stone in space, hurry now to cut on top of the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If it does not come out when you feel it with your finger, then moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil, if the patient is old, or dry your second finger, if the patient is young and perfect; and insert it into its base, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, if the stone is at the neck of the bladder; then press from above with your finger, and insert it where you see that it needs to be cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to squeeze the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend his right hand with the coins above, and with his left hand oste the leather which is in front of the coins at the part where the waist is made; then i pour the spatumile, from which this is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And open between what is between the coins and the fundament, not in the middle but at the cost of the left side; and let it be right on the stone, and your two are joined to the fundament, and let the size of the passage be large at the end, and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too big; perhaps the press if there is a part that is down, so it doesn't work; and know that there is a part where it goes out; and if there is a part that is up, like a ball, and round, whose exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grand; et s'elle ne sautie, si convient que tu extranges sus les tenailles qui sont aisi comme une lime au chef, pour mues extranger la pierre si qu'elle n'eschape; ou tu bottes desoez li i instrument subtil corbé au chef; et s'tu ne la pois engignier ensi, si eslarge i poc le pertus, et se li sans decort, si l'estraction de vitriole; et s'il y a plus d'une pierre, si bottes premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trais fuer, et les petites apres s'il en y a plusors.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	If the stone is very large, it is appropriate to make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things that happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes out immediately because his loop cannot hold it; but nevertheless you force him to extract it, or to break it with tweezers, piece by piece; and when you have finished your work, if you employ the wound with resin and aloe and dragon's blood, and extract it, and put a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess, then tie up the patient's neck tightly for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have dislocated it, then arise well oil and water its place, then cure it with the ointment of black cumin and with ointment basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses come into the wound and corrosions, and congealments of blood in the bladder, and is held back urine, which is passed in a certain way that without jump with urine: then you should put something in the wound, and extract the blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and wash it; then raise the wound with water and air and string, and help it in all ways that you are able, until it is healed; and it is convenient that all the times that you cure it, that you bind its legs, and bring together the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it lies in the urethra, and is fixed there, and urine cannot come out; if you treat it thus as I have said above, that you cut many times, then excuse yourself from cutting because of this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proved this.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take care to forge it according to this form, and be it three inches long, fixed with three pins:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a file and polish the edge of the chisel on stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then dip the chisel lightly in the stone, until you can pierce the stone from the other side; then soon the urine will come out, then press your hand on what is delayed from the stone which is inside the chisel.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is suddenly broken, and flies with the urine, and is healed; and if you cannot do this in any way so that it is hurt, then I file the stone on one side and another above it, then remove it strongly, and wash away the frozen blood which is in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the women's stone
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It may be that stone is caused in women, and if it never happens, there is great pain, and it is defended by three things: one is that per adventure the woman is virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to uncover herself in front of midwives, even though she is married.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that if per adventure one cannot find a woman who knows how to uncover herself in front of midwives, even though she is married. And the fourth method is that if the woman's stone is more perfect than the man's, so that one needs to make a deeper cut, and there is great fear; then, if necessity requires, if you find a midwife who is knowledgeable in this art, and you do not find her, do not seek any further. I cast doubt on her castness; and if she does it, she should put out her right hand or foot and want for the stone; and if she gets it, she should hold it tight, and he recommends that she puts her left hand under her belly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she tears, then it is necessary that she move little by little from the entrance of the bladder to the root of the thigh, until she comes to the root of the leg; then cut on the stone in the root of the leg against the middle where the bone is dressed, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her two legs above the stone or below, and make the size small first; then press her at the size, if you feel the stone so close to the wound that the stone can come out, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large, hard and smooth, long and round, and some have rain.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the appearances so as to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it does not go away, then put the vitriolic broient on it, and keep it an hour until the stone is well-soaked; then return to your work, until the stone is gone, and have tools that I told you about for drawing out the stone at men's aid in your work; and if it does not go away, and it is of the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the place and strain the water and wine, and do not renew it, and leave the stone, and do not draw it out, lest perhaps the patient die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the wound is abated, and the blood clotted, if it returns to your work, as long as the stone is away.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The water that comes out of the kidney is nothing but a mixture of white pus that comes from inside the testicle, which is what causes the hernial pain; and it is called "syfac," and it does not really exist in the sac of the testicle, if we believe that it is another organ; and this pus is between the white syfac that we have mentioned; and such a thing does not happen.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this hernia, since it is of weakness, comes to the testicles, and expands that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And it does not really happen that there is a blow on the testicles, and this water has many colors: or it is a color declining to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white water, and such happens more; and these are the signs of the mixture that we have mentioned: for if it is white syfac, as we have said, it is a red swelling, a long shape like an organ, and does not close the testicles, because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Et s'il a moisture en la propre toile, si est les apôtres raison avec une partie de l'œuf, et pour ceu pense on que c'est un autres œuf; et s'il la moisture est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc sfac, si le sent om bien; donques quand tu veux savoir la couleur de la moisture, si éprouve à tout l'intromissoire quarreit, de coi la forme est ci devant.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	And if there is moisture in the fabric itself, then the egg whites have reason with a part of the yolk, and for this one thinks that it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the eggs and the white sfac, then it feels good; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, test everything in the intromissoire, from which its shape comes.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be made well according to his power and the repletion of his body; then he sits on his back, on something a little high, and puts many sheets over him; then he sits on his left side, and commands the minister that he sit on his right, and extends the staff to one of the two ribs from which the eggs come out; then he takes the scalpel and splits the skin among them until the long bone, and is your cut all straight in dividing the skin of the ribs, and the escutcheon gently according to one's power; then pierce the white sfac with water at a large hole, and drain all the water, and then put your fingers, and draw up the sfac upstream; and do not touch the rib, but let the sfac alone; split every part separately or together the rib of him with care, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return; and if the egg was to escape to your work, take it back in its place when you have finished the work of the sfac; then join the two ribs at a seam, and heal them as you would other wounds, until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by some other disease, it is necessary that you lay the eggs that are suspended, in doubt of decay of blood; then cut off the coion to all the suspension, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the egg is assembled in two parts together, knowing that these are two branches; then cut off the other part as you did the first evenly, and wash away the blood, and put into another wound wet with oil of roses; and place away another piece of wool wet with wine and oil, and put on the two coions, and cover with doubled drapels, and bind all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two drapels, and fill them with woolen cloth according to this appearance and are assembled by sewing in the throat of the breeches, and one of the shoulders preigns on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part of the hand; and the other of the two chiefs on the two armpits, and is all gathered together in the loop of the breeches; and no medicine this ramice of cautery in place of a iron of size, and is that you preigns I cautery cultellaire subtle, and cut off the skin of the coions, and be heated as we have said, so that the white syfac that contains the egg is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce those syfacs once, and burn them with this subtle cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut it in all ways that you can, as long as you remove everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this operation is safer; and watch out for the evacuation of blood, and be sure that the cuts on the testicles are well done; and if anything makes you uncomfortable, or an abscess or the evacuation of blood or anything else, treat what makes you uncomfortable, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to wait for this operation because of its horror, then provide a perforation, as I have said before, and it is that when you are sure by the signs that we have mentioned that the water has come out, then place the patient on one side; because the abscess should be cut in the part of the testicles to the whole skin wide, and insert the perforation long through the heart; and make the holes large so that all the water runs out; then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and let it run out the remaining water, then cure it as soon as the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out into the mouth of the wound, then you must put a feather or the instrument with which the water is drained from the hydropic places, so that it forms as I have said before; and enlarge the wound slightly, and know that the water returns and comes together after VI months or less, and when it has come together in the manner that I have said before, then the patient's days will pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the testes
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	I understand that in this passage it is said that there are many conditions for which it is better to leave it alone; and I will tell you about the use and appearance of the testicles.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many testes come from horse, and most often from cow; and it is mostly like this.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to say by the acrid and bitter excess which is spread to the testes, or by impact; and the color of the testes depends on the color of the horse; and does not cause pain, but is a grief to the testes; and perhaps there is a grievious and painful testicle with a pale color, and never comes from an artery, nor from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by way of an artery, if the testicles are hot due to the disposition of the testicles, when you press them with your hands; and it only seems appropriate that you touch them.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Who is made of the growth of the vein is known by its position to the expression of the touch of the two hands, and can do om well in the size on this appearance, and on the other characters; and it is that you cope the cure of the coions, then is the egg in the top, and the training stronger than white syfac, and deliver the suspender from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already soaked with these characters born, then it is appropriate that you pull the egg and cope; and if it is higher in white syfac, or in this which is inside the vessels, then it is appropriate that you deliver all that is held, and cope smoothly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the character is behind the egg, then it is appropriate that you cope all of it, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, if you cover the wound with wool wetted with oil and wine, then he will be cured by other treatments until he is well.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is one of the most common types of abscesses, wrapped in a covering that looks like a bag of oil, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient groans greatly when he goes; and the treatment for this disease is so similar to what has been mentioned above, and we will tell you the work of it according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit down on a soft seat, then pour the liquid suspensory of the testicles into his mouth with both hands, all around the penis, and dip the masters, and spread them out; then cut across each part with a sharp instrument in the middle, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples; then put a needle there with double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come; and immediately tie it to the other end; then wrap them tightly, according to the length of the body, and drain out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as we have said above for the extraction of the testicles, so that no vassal chokes so that it does not grow again; because by this there is no harm, and all the vassals grow again, therefore you should extract the testicles from all the vassals; so that the eye does not lose its sight through the incision of the vassels, and they dry up and do not heal.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the sutra
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	of the rupture of the sutra With regard to this chapter, if it is due to sectioning that the sutura is broken or extended on the abdomen in the part of the angina, so that the intestine descends from that rupture into one of the loins; and this rupture is either from the sutura, or from the extension thereof, and these two ways are caused by beating, jumping, braying, or a sudden grievance, and by similar things; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the sutra, if it is little and little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the apophemis are equal up to the whole, so that the sutura presses the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to the section of the sutra, that it brings about a sudden pain, and the apophemis are different in appearance, pressing on the skin, and this is for the exit of the intestine and the body away from the sutura.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And never remove the loops with intestines, and are held back, and cause great pain to the patient, even when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	In these treatments of fear, because it must be avoided.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And in these treatments of fear, because it must be avoided. In the manner of dislocation, so order the patient that he keeps the intestines in his hand on the inside of the wound, if he can enter; then is swished over his throat, between your hands, and the skin cut; then place the blade on top, and cut through all the skin as long as possible; then bottle up the juices from the liver of the animal, according to what you need to open the wound, and let it out; then wash the cuts with water, and dry them; then cut a hole in the skin over the liver, as far down as possible, and cut a V-shaped piece of skin from one side to the other, taking care not to damage any nerves; then take two fingers of your left hand and place them on either side of the cut in the skin, which is behind the rib cage; then grasp the rib cage firmly with your right hand; then cut through the liver, cutting it into pieces as small as possible; then cut the pieces so that they are connected to each other in a V shape, and tie them together; then wrap the skin around the pieces of liver, and tie them together in two parts, so that no vessels or nerves can get inside, and let the blood out; then take an needle with a strong thread made of XX threads, and bottle it up behind the skin, which is behind the rib cage; then cut the threads so that there are four threads; then join them together in a cross shape, and tie the skin to one another, as we have said before; then wrap the threads around the pieces of liver, and tie them together in two parts, so that no vessels or nerves can get inside, and let the blood out; then cut off a piece of skin from the chest that is twice as long as the thread, and join it to the first long thread of the cross; then after these two threads leave the skin which is behind the rib cage, the wide end, and tie them together; then wrap the skin around the liver pieces, so that they do not slip out, and bind them firmly; then bring moist wool and put it on the wound, and apply the thread we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is cauterized with the white substance that we have said, after the incision, for doubt of decay of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and leaves the ligature as long as it heals itself; and if it delays in healing, let it be raised with hot water, and apply what we have said, as long as it heals; then cure the wound with other remedies until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnous
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I have never seen anyone dare to make the cure with fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old man said that it is made in this way: as if you tie together the legs of a lamb, in a certain way you tie them, after cutting them off lightly at the root; then cut them up and cure the abscess of him who has it, as long as his legs are still growing, and treat them as we have said, until they are completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes when there is a tear in the arteries, as we have said, and open their channels; and let no intestines flow into the pouches, and if they do flow, it is little, and repair every hour; but nevertheless, if it remains too long in this place, it believes that the wound or syphac hurts so much that the intestines flow; and that which happens by the extension of the syphac which is at the arteries, as we have said, for it is extended, then it becomes softened and inflated their channels and open; and the cure is by cauterization, as we have before said; and in no way is cured by iron in this way: but that the patient lies calmly on his back between your hands, then take up the channel of the tear at its widest according to the quantity of III doses; and then remove the syphac which is under the skin that covers it, then take a string and put it on the visible channel of the syphac; and press it perfectly against the stomach, then cut the II channels that appear on the syphac on top of the string, and cut them both; then remove the head of the string, and do not cover the syphac or extend the oil nor anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramose intestines; then cure it by the cure of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you tie up the wounds, if it is a burn, then heal the wound as soon as possible.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syrup is constrictive, and does not have an appearance in the cut, and the cauterization is wet in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of softening the leather of the hips
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the leather of the hips is softened in some men, so that the hairs that are within are softened and can be seen; and it is necessary, when you cure him, to make him turn over on his back, and to cut off the leather which is softened on the natural leather; then join the two lips together with one seam or three firm seams; then sew between the seams, and heal it as other wounds, until it is cured, and cut off the excess.
dou chastrement	Dou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that cauterization is performed according to two methods: by attraction, or by incising.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method that we perform by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the joint is softened and still; then grip it with your hand, so that you no longer feel it.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Du chastrement de taille: Il convient que tu teignes la meilleure vache, et presse le cuir des côonnes à ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sur chaque œil un cope, lorsque tu les auras bien écorchées; et laisse aucun trou dans le sipec et le sous-tige qui est sur les vasselins; et cette manière de chastrement est plus mûre que celle qui est faite par attraction, pour ce que à l'attraction peut arriver qu'aucune chose des côonnes, par conséquent la vache désire luxure; puis guéris la plaie tant qu'elle soit saine.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites: It is fitting that you take the best heifer, and press the skin of the cows to your left hand, then tie the suspensory, and bandage each eye with a bandage, when you have well scorched them; and leave no hole in the splay and the sub-tige which is on the vats; and this mode of chastisement is more mature than that which is done by attraction, for what if attraction may happen that there is no thing of the cows, so that the cow desires luxure; then heal the wound until it is well.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite is according to two ways of men: the one where between the two crotches it opens as the figure of nature of a woman, or he has hair, and sometimes in the arse the urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way is in women, and it has on the loins knuckle also as a penis and two crotches.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the cure of the male and female is that you copulate the female organs together, and the cure is as other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps out through the skin of the crotches, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tentacle
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	is an organ that joins to the natural part, so much so that it is too ugly to see; and some women also have it as a hand, and this is the cure.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you cut off the excess of the tentacle at your hand or oncines, and copulate it lightly; and do not cut too much all at once, lest there be an evacuation of blood, then cure with another cure as long as it remains healthy; and at another organ that grows out of the mouth of the mare, and employs it, and perhaps it jumps out, and is according to the appearance of a cow, and for this they called it the ancient “cow disease”.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you have to cut it, as we said before, and heal it until it is well.
de erratique	of errant
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	of errant If nature in the woman is not yet perceived, or the hunchback is small; and is fashioned by birth, or incidentally by disease that has come; or it is through the use of a cart, or a subtle herb or spice, and is made perfect in marriage, or in costards, or in cheese, or whatnot; and their ability to conceive, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this one is by the regard of the dance.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	For if the stoop is close at hand, appearing suddenly, would you like it to be towards your two hands or to the right?
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If the subtle herb is and is close to the leaves, if you hurry, and turn suddenly: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two leaves as much as the subtle herb is wet, and let the stoop come; then take wool, and moisten it with oil, and put it on the spot, and lie the woman on her back every day, so that he cannot hold it together.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syrup is thick and heavy, you must take a spoon that resembles a leaf of thyme.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For the dressing of wounds, take horsehair, if possible, and dip it in milk; and add medicines that stop the bleeding, as if by accident, dragon's blood, incense, and a mixture of oil; then put on a wide cloth, so that the wound does not close; and let it be for a long time, and apply linseed oil; then, treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	When the mare gives birth to a foal, if she is covered in this way, there will be no abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For when the mare has an abscess that has formed, one must not touch her with fire.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	are openings of veins for which, without surgical intervention, and when these hemorrhoids are old, they become thistle-like; and we have already described in the division the appearance of arrows, signs, and I will say here those that bring about healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and the hymen, when they are fully developed in the body, do not come to light except for the treatment by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the vagina can be felt, they can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then tie the hymen with strings, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood, as is done here and there with dragon's blood and incense and similar things; then plug her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if blood comes out, you make her sit in a infusion of sumac and oak bark and gall and similar things, and then take barley flour, and confound it with honey and so on, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, it's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	And if not, then apply hot packs to the back and massage without hurting; then take another, and put it in juice of plantain or of mistletoe with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has healed, care for the wound as I have said above; and that which is called 'balath' is red, and looks like a rough head, so cover it up as I have said; and then care for it until it has healed.
des apostemes de la marris	The abscesses of the breasts
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Various kinds of abscesses can appear in the breast, such as syphilis, painful abscesses, herpes, suppurations, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases which I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is therefore necessary that I die in this treatise the cauterization of the abscesses that arise in the knee, which are not asses but hot bowels; and if you know how to cauterize with fire, you will see that the abscesses are inflamed at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So then it is necessary that I die in this treatise the cauterization of the abscesses that arise in the knee, which are not asses but hot bowels; and if you know how to cauterize with fire, you will see that the abscesses are inflamed at the beginning of their appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if they turn red, you can see them. Don't hurry to pierce it, but let me die as long as the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit down on II seats where he leans, and supports his back and joins his feet together so that the leg is apart; and may his knees be spread out, and he puts his arms behind his back, and ties them well with a good bond; then he sucks the breath towards his left coast, and I introduce the instrument by which the mouth of the abscess is operated on, from which afterwards comes the form; and it is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, you stick the pointed end first to know the depth of the abscess, so that what enters through the instrument does not come in more perfectly than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover its perfection with drapes, so that the instrument does not harm him; and it is necessary that he put the tip of the instrument on top, and darken it.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and the hand is made soft with oil, if it is necessary to cover the head, let it be done with a linen cloth; and when the bowels are empty, if it is necessary that you put wet tents in the wound with rosewater or green dry oil; then put the tent away from the wound completely at the marrow, and put it on the other side of the marrow and the other hand cleanly moistened with water or dried herbs; then continue with the ointment after two days coming to this, as long as he is well; and never raise the marrow and the wound by a cup of water and honey, and then of water or roots of licorice and arnold long are cooked; then heal with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed over the marrow, you must beware of cooking with iron, but heal it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is proper at the birth that she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman hurry down, and desire to smell the air: then the child's foot quickly appears; then you know that these births are according to the natural figure, and the issue is with her head, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then lightly press her belly, so that the child comes soon; for when it descends on her head, then the second one with him, and is born by good purification; and what comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes never on its feet, and comes by force in the chest or shoulder, and the hands, or it comes on her stomach, or often, and is turned by accident on her neck, and by other evil shapes; it is proper at the birth that she be wise and skilled in these things, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how to aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the baby falls on his head by natural fall, and the woman delivers with pain, and the virtue of him is weak, so let her sit on a saddle, or women hold it; and rise up his essence of oil or fenugreek be boiled, and then pour the ball between his two little spatumiles where this is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	If the baby falls on his head by natural fall, and the woman delivers with pain, and the virtue of him is weak, so let her sit on a saddle, or women hold it; and rise up his essence of oil or fenugreek be boiled, and then pour the ball between his two little spatumiles where this is the form: and split the second, and cut off his nail as much as the moisture that is in him runs; and press her belly until the baby drops, and if he does not drop, then it is necessary to clisterize the woman with muskira of fenugrec with oil of sisament; then make her press and shake for an hour: so now the baby.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out, it is necessary that you pull them lightly little by little; and if they cannot enter, put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up; then take off the chair from the ground, and wrap her, so that she does not stand up; and if her hands cannot enter, and the child dies, if he grabs his hands with the knife that is placed in front, and pulls out the child, and pull it even.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	the child's delivery from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out of its feet, it is necessary to turn it upside down; and then pull it little by little until it is even; and then stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can't it jump just as much as its knees, if she is commanded to bend, and makes her vibrate with the condition; if it can jump, let God help you.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't work like we've said, then let it be slowly turned, as long as it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he is lightly healed.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if he doesn't work like we've said, then take muscellaige of althaea, oil of sesamum, gum melted, and grind it all together in a mortar; and put it on the nature of the woman inside and cover it up; then let her sit in water until her ribs are dry; and when she is moistened again, let her sit in a chair, then make her sneeze and squeeze her mouth and nose, and lightly press her belly because now the pain comes.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	the delivery of the child between its legs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if I hold his feet lightly; then he is hung on his neck, and his legs hang down; and when he lies on his side, and I press his feet lightly, and then I put my hands on his belly, and open his crotch until he is fully delivered; and the child does not move, so take his legs and form his body, then turn his belly up, and then pour water over him; and command the woman to lean back while the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of a child who comes from the wide a hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	to bring back the hand: if one can't bring it back, let the woman get up and go; if she can't walk, let her lie down on the bed, and make her legs bend together; then apply the muscle relaxation that I have described; and if she doesn't give birth, let her sit on a chair, then try to bring back the hand; and shape the child according to its natural form, and make it sneeze, and order that she stretch as far as she can.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the birth of the child on his neck, and spread his hands, and turned his face towards his mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	to bring the child up by his hand, then turn him little by little, and make him light; and when he is even, put him on the natural muscle form of tall and oil, as we have said, then order that she move little by little; and when you have done this, let her sit on a chair, and order her to stretch; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	by this middle method to all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to this method for all the second part, if the child's foot is put in such a way that the moisture is removed; and if he is bent on his face and neck, so that he can not be held back, and dies the child; then pour the child inside, until you have put it as it should be, and command the woman to not sway at all: then, if it is slightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	It is known that twins are often born, and not often more than three or four; and this is not an unusual thing, and it does not happen often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are an unusual thing, and they do not live, unless by chance; but I know that, when they are multiplied, and devised by the doctor who prescribes them, which is to say, by the balm; and they are never born naturally as all others, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if it hurts, if the cure is as we have said, and let the doctor be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what he does; and do so as it deserves for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None of the times are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more to XV, and they are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and know that the doctor knows everything, for by chance similar things came; so do according to what it deserves.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the wife of the dead child or belly, as I said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to work with your hands; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound health, and she has no accident or she has feared death; it is necessary that the woman be tied to her back, and her legs are lifted up; and the minister coats II parts with oil, or she is bound to the bed so that she can be treated for the child's descent; then rub the mouth of the wife with moist oils with muscatel of althaea and fenugrec and linseed, then anoint the doctor's hands with these oils and these muskatailes; then pour them into the woman legibly, then wants I leu or she pours the oncines that are suitable for this, and takes care that the child is dressed so that it descends on its head; then he puts the oncines in his hair or in his neck or in his mouth or at his palace or at her beard or at the forceps or near the sides, and the descent is on the feet, if he pours or pinches him and cuts near the costes, and it is necessary that he teigne the oncine in his right hand, and puts the corbeure between his two hands of his left hand, and pours the oncine legierement with all his hand, and puts the oncine in any of the leus that we have said, until it comes to the empty thing; and this is the form of the oncine:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	And then take another one, where you need it, so that the extractions are even; and then make them even by moving them from one side to the other, so that they come out, and the teeth of the oncines hold them, as is this form.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if one part stays behind, so rub some oil on its two sides and press them in that part, and pull the other part; and if none stay behind, so put this oncines or higher up, and do it as long as they all come out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot bring it back because of stretching, then you must wrap a cloth around it until it is all stretched out; then cover it in the joint of the sole or at the foot, and likewise do with the other hand, and at the feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	Et si la tête de l'enfant est grossière et il est en difficulté lors de l'accouchement, ou s'il a un chef aigu assemblé, il convient que vous pressiez le spatumile épineux entre vos deux mains, et frottez le chef et retirez l'aigu; ou vous le ronge avec l'instrument qui est appelé «almidach», de lequel la forme vient avec les instruments ou la chapitre qui est après celui-ci; et ainsi aussi je fais en sorte que le bébé ait une tête naturellement grande; et puis traire fort les os aux tenaille, et si la tête saute, elle est tirée par la force, si elle est fendue, tant que l'humidité qui est à pis issue soit; et s'elle ne peut pas sortir, si tu la perces par morceaux au mues que tu peux; et s'il est gonflé au ventre ou sous les côtes, il convient que tu le perces tant que l'humidité cours.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he fell on his feet, if the atraction is light, and the re-direction towards the mouth of the mare is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	If he fell on his abdomen or chest, if you cover him with the wrapper over your hand; and open the abdomen or chest as much as the moisture allows; and if another limb is dislocated and the joint remains stuck, then tie his hand tightly to the mare's mouth, and draw it out until it comes out; then cut it off or chop it off; and if the mare's mouth has tightened due to a hot abscess that has come, there is no need to bother it, but to treat with moist and greasy things; and treat with poultices, and cut in water that softens and moistens.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	If he fell on his side, and you can make it even, then treat as we have said for the live child; and if we cannot do that, then cut him into pieces and leave nothing of the second one.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, bring him the one that we spoke about in the apothecaries' shops because they come from the sea; and if he comes to land, let him be kept in salt water, and bring him other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had died, and another consulting about that child, and another saying that the child was dead.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, the wound opened again and began to pour a lot of pus.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat it, and I thought for a long time, but I could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and there came out a bone, and after a few days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled very much, for the belly had no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I wanted to make the wound, and hold it in my hands, as long as the woman was in a good position; and waited for the woman until she had been there a long time, and a little bow of leather came off its place; and I did not remember this ointment before, but when the master tried an unusual thing, he knew how to bring help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to put the wife back in her place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	Here comes the form of the compress, where we fix the bones; and at the same time turn the shoulders of the two legs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	However, the nails should be thinner than the restringers and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the tube must be wide enough, and the margins even, and about a palm and a half long; and these two supports are to be fastened together, one on each side, with something firm, about half a palm long; and these two supports are to be inserted into the mouth of the wife in order to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted above the ground and multiplied in number; and when you have arranged them, the work is more quickly done and higher up for its quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument unless you have prepared it, for there is no excuse for its lack of use.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second is held back at birth, you should instruct the patient to retain her hair and then make her throw it out with her body, and then keep your hands from her mouth and nose; and if she cries because of this, all is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If she does not, I can take her, and make a hole or a cover, and put in herbs that may open the mouth of the mare, as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, shall be boiled or brewed in water over the fire; then put one pipe or a cover on the pot, and another in her mouth, and let it hang until the vapors come up into the mare; then make her spit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you miss the second time treatment.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	If it remains after this cure and is not better, order her to soak her left hand in oil of mint or in musk of aloes, and then let it dry naturally, and then apply the second time; and when she has found it, if she pricks it and stretches it little by little correctly, so that the thread does not break at the extraction; but move it lightly from side to side, and then draw it out; then it will come off.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the patient is tight and hard to extract, we have said the cure of sneezing and vaporization of herbs; and if she does not do all that we have said, be careful not to follow her when you extract it; but it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the patient, that you tie him to the woman's crotch, then cleanse him with ointment of four-fold pepper; if he will and will recover, but nevertheless, when she does this so that a bad odor comes from the stomach and the head, and bleeds the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If it is necessary, then there are suitable fumigations for this: no one has tried the fumigation of nettle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument, to which you smoke the woman at the retention of flowers and the second one, is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is like the form of a dog, and you place the thin head in nature, and the wide heads above the fire; and let the fumigations on the coals, and the tallow until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	For many children are born who have not yet pierced the foundation, but a skillful surgeon pierces it at his right time, and does not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and sews up the wound so that he does not touch it; then put on another moistened cloth with wine and oil, and cure the wound until it is well.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not recover, then put a splint on it and leave it unmoved, and let the bone be exposed when it goes to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there is no risk of sudden injury to the wound or abscess; if it is necessary to cover the wound with a bandage: if you are cured, as we have said, with the cane of plonk.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are difficult to treat, and they grow larger than those that come from the loins or between the two members; and when this nodation is old, if it is opened and a little warm water or thin bile is applied, such fistulas never heal; and they are caused by whatever passes through or out of the patient when he has an emission or wind.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if it pierces to the bladder, and just to half the shaft of the penis; and reach up to the join of the scrotum, and just to the tip of the cow's nose.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And then recognize where the fistula reaches to the foundation, and does not reach further; and it is that you stick your little finger or foundation, and stick a fine needle of bronze or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has tortuosity, then stick in a tent of bronze, or I of horse's hair, as far as you feel the tent or the hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and does not come from perspiration nor windness nor vision, as we have said: be careful that it does not pierce; if you hurry to heal.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is persisting up to the bladder or up to the conduit of the urine, if it does not hold the urine, and cannot be sustained with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is piercing up to the joint of the uterus, then try going up to the source; if there is no twisting and no invention of pain within, if it has already come out at one end, and does not respond to any medicine or pressure; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure but work, and vanity of foolish things that meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In the one that is not persistent and is not old, there is hope of health by surgery, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and let the legs go up to their hips, and let the hips be bent towards his belly; then pour a bucket of rain, or a splash if there is twisting, as long as you know where the fistula comes out.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain at the base of his foot, then he should feel when the second toe is pricked; and when he feels between the first and second fingers, then you will know that it is a persisten injury, and if there is no treatment, it will not heal.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	If the patient feels pain at the base of his foot, then he should feel when the second toe is pricked; and when he feels between the first and second fingers, then you will know that it is a persisten injury, and if there is no treatment, it will not heal.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If this happens, then it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If he is not otherwise cured; and if he tries to pull it out, and does not pierce all the way up to the root that is at the base, and there is a thick covering between your two fingers where you feel the fistula coming out from under the covering; then take hold of the edge of the swelling of the fistula, and tie it tightly before pulling it off, and then apply the cautery afterwards until it comes to the tip of the swelling; and the swelling will be taken off, and he will recover. Then destroy those covers that look like a quill of an owl, and there is none left.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal and a scar forms between you and the work, then apply fire cautery or bitter medicine to the scar.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery combines two things: namely, the burning of these joints that have been dislocated, and the drawing out of blood and drying up of moisture; then treat wet tent-like things with dry wood or crushed herbs, until they stop oozing, and burn those joints in the wood; then cure the wound by removing stubborn blackened matter that has hardened, using dry medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored, if it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes only to the foundation, and is distant from the heart, let him boil it up or at the foundation, and inquire that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	And if you feel the pulse, and it is between the toe or the syphil or the char, or it is ready to pierce, there will only be a way of engagement and hope through one of the three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it up to the root, or if you can put on tents and cure it as first; and do not go too far in the end, so that you cover the covering which holds the root, and bring the exudations by the voluntary way; then cure it, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and wash it after it has been cut from the root, or with a tent or any other tool attached; then burn that rotten flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and to delay the fistula in the part away from the root: this will be lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no fistulas according to this method: and it is when you plug the tent in the fistula, and she is or costs of the foundation delicious leather on top, if take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pour I thread tort in II, and pour the tent all the way in the fistula until it is at the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then remove the thread from that pierced, so that you plug your two at the foundation; and tie the head of the thread, and join the two shoulders together, and remove one from the other, and leave it for a day or two; and do not restrain it again, until the thread covers those slits that are between them, and they rub; then cure the wound until it is sewed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, if you make it pierce in all the ways that you can, if it is too much emparfonto
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not good to make a bandage tight all at once, and then to unbind it, if one wishes for the wound to heal completely.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	For the form of the sputum with thorns that one makes for the fistula is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other; and on the other hand it is not good to bandage what one should not bandage, as you see here.
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Here are hemorrhoids: some are inside the foundation, like grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they should be tied together, as you see here; some are outside the foundation, and these have a little moisture, and suddenly dry up, and are colored like the flesh; and the cure for those who have them inside the foundation is this: tell the patient to strain himself in order to let the foundation come out, and to use hot compresses until it comes out completely; if the foundation cannot be taken out because of moisture, then tie it with a bandage or a piece of cloth, or with a cotton string; and take it between your fingers, then tie it, and powder it with some hot powders that are in the fire for cauterizing; or you can cauterize it as described in the chapter on cauterizing, since other cures will not work until it heals completely; and if the foundation cannot come out, then use a warm enema to wash what is inside the foundation, so that it can come out easily; when the patient has strained himself, and the foundation comes out, the cure is light.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you thread the needle in this way: take a twisted thread and put it into an needle, then draw the thread through from one side of the needle and back again, and join the two ends of the thread together; make the knot large; then pull the thread tight, and remove the needle; do the same for all the others, and leave it there to let the blood flow; then put a moistened cloth onto the foundation and cover it with a bandage; order that the patient rest; and then leave him alone until he stops bleeding, and when he has stopped, treat him with poultices and other treatments until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	and dry at the end or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often happens drying out at the end in the intestine, and by confinement of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape the skin off a finger or your nail from above, which you do not allow to dry; then heal it until it is hard as it should be; and if it cannot be healed, then start scraping more vigorously than before, until it heals over and is peeled off; then heal it until it is healed.
dou fremit	He will sweat profusely.
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	It is a small pale spot before the horse's body, and it spreads all over; and one does not feel it tickle, and one feels it like death, and it comes all over the body, and more so in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a feather from an eagle or a strong vulture, and put that feather on the sweat, until it turns purple all around; then turn your hand around the entire feather as much as you can, and put it in place, and scrape the sweat from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then make this of a dog's or a horse's tooth according to this form and be careful with the sharp edges and let it run over.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, lest it may split, and must hold together; and if you see, then cauterize the sore, as it is before or with fire-cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the 클리스터
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No clister made of silver or brass, or melted gold or lead; and no such instruments are small or large, according to the which they are brought.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	So it is that one brings for the cure of children and who are weak and painful, are small ones.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the clister is small and big if above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I say that there is a rupture where the belly is bound, so as you see, and the chest is inside, pierced; and has two ruptures, one on each side; and let the belly be put medicine of a bladder or parchment, and pierce all around the small ruptures, and let there be between each breach an amount of space, then pour into these breaches a strong thread twisted X or wire around it, and bind the belly as if it were a sheepskin; and when the medicine is inside, so bind with the instrument before a strong thread, then sterilize. And this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and grease the head with oil or honey wax or similar thing, then pour it lightly; then the minister's hands together, until he is all wet, then remove the poultice, and lift the patient's legs against the wall, and let the medicine come out, if so much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize him because of a decay of the stomach, and the medicine hastens to come out, then remind him until he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation or abscess, then is the cautery also fine as for a child; and this is the form of the fine cautery on which the skin is tightened:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; but now we will tell you about the treatment of hands and medicines, according to fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that there are various wounds according to what they are made, and according to the places where they are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that cause wounds are because of a hit of stone, and a cut of sword or dagger, or lance or club or axe or spear; or which are made according to the places of the body, such as a wound that hits on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds on the head, because the reminder will come in his chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from a stone or similar thing, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large, and you doubt much about the scalp: if he does so soon heal from the blood of the wound, and let his food be unlike wine and fatty meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	I say that if he does not heal soon, if his flesh is weakened, and he does not drink wine, nor eat fatty meat; and put on the wound, if it is hot, wet cotton in oil or vinegar, and if there is no heat, put it on, as I will say a little later; and if he has moved it, put some garlic on it, until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is great as of a sword-blade and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, if they are brought together by stitching, as I will say to the wounds of the belly, from the stitchery.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	And if the wound is uncovered by bone, and it stands up and lasts only for one day, then patch it; but cure the wound with medicine, and restore it hard in place of leather, and instruct the patient to eat big meats, as well as baked wheat and similar foods.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find leather putrefaction, and it has not reached the bone, then patch it well and firmly, and cure it; and if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which must be stopped without a tourniquet, and it cannot be staunched by medicine, then ligate the artery, and if that does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then is the treatment light: and that you put this powder into them so that fire has moved them.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live chalz three parts, and powdern it finely, and apply the wound, and bind it tightly, until it has healed well and joined together all its blood; and then bind it firmly, and leave it undissolved, unless it swells; for one should not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never should one use live chalz solely, except when one has incense or dragon'blood, but fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fire has moved the wound, surely it is too late to use this powder; but put on some distilled oils or a poultice of flour made with water and honey, until it stops bleeding; then treat it with other remedies as long as it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the fracture of a bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine tweezers; and I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound at the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is at the throat and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but the artery at the throat is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the neck, then there is no other device than to leave it free to heal, and not put anything restraining on it, because it harms the neck and causes it to retract; and do not put anything on the wound, for the substance of the neck is cold, and its continuation with the skull, which is the highest bone; but make it a mixture, as warm water with rosewater, and mixed with oil, and wash it also with fresh water, and other stones of the same kind according to this way, and moisten it with oiled wax.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then bind it with strips, and then treat until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and he is bruised and swollen with bowels, then the piercing or deeper; and if the artery is cut, and blood runs out, so it is dried up, and cauterized, this is his duty; and if the swelling in the throat is cut, or the voice, and the conduct is preserved, because the flesh goes, if the cure on the chin of the throat, and does not touch the throat but sets it according to its natural figure; and then he is held forward, and left for some days, then he is treated with ointments that are thrown away until he is healed; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then seek it; and if there are pieces of bone, then forge them all, as you can, and those that you cannot have, leave until the wound rots, and be in pain and strict its issue; and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound, and there is an fistula, then treat it as I said in the chapter of the ointment.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the wound is deep, then observe the patient's breath: for then the wound is mortal; but if it is not deep, and is fresh throughout the entire body, then do not apply the powder at first, nor bind it so as to restrain the flow of blood, but let it ooze; but put on an ointment that attracts moisture, and leave it in place for three days, or four, or more; if you do not get a spasmodic or painful twitching of the body, nor any signs of strangeness or binding; and when you see the bones moving about, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure the wounds of tents and other cures, as long as it is healthy; and if it cannot heal, then suture the fistula that has formed, as should be done.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a knife or sword and it is simple, deep or on the back, then heal that which is before; if it is large, stitch it, and if it is small, use powder, and if it has broken into pieces of bone, then clean the wound, and the trayned members if they are dislocated; and if they are not dislocated, then let the wound run its course, and so speed up the extractions; and for other wounds to other members, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Dou derrompement dou ventre
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Dou derrompement dou ventre est gran and mòis and pis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intègne, ou li ners des intèngnes, par quoi li intrumission d'aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaus pis li petite plaie que li gran, por ceu c'on remet plus a poinne les intèngnes en, s'on ne les i remet de chaute en chaute; por ce que li intègne enfleont tantost qu'il sentent le froi, si rentrent plus a poinne, et por ceu vaus mès li moïne plaie, por ceu c'on ramoine mès l'intènge à son lé que as autres II. Et saiches que li derropement dou ventre est selonc III manieres: les II costures communes avient en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et déclairai.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestine has come out, and there is something to be done, it is through one of the two ways: or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said; or because the intestine is swollen by fever.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is fevered, heat it in the following manner: wet a sponge or a thin drape entirely in warm water, or cook in warm squinning and cumin and spice, and remove the intestine as much as it swells; and never stop doing this, and let it rest that it may cool down.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or warm it and cook herbs, for by this means the entry is slightly closed; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the place where one copes with hemorrhoids; and the first cure is to rest that one, which we do not cut unless there is great need; and this is the instrument to split it: if you cut inside the sheath and take it out, and see this form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are protruding, if you can put them back in their natural place in their proper position, for that is difficult.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and his legs raised higher than his head; and if the wound is in the upper part of the abdomen, then the head and chest should be raised higher than the lower part; and so one should treat large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, dress the patient as you would, then place your hand upon the wound, and use a sharp implement to pierce the entire length of the wound, and close it up; and this is the common way to sew, and it is that you should use a sharp needle or more, according to the size of the wound, and leave a little space at each end, and fix the thread tightly with knots; and so one should treat large and small wounds.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine then it had been outside for XXIIIII hours, and the wound was closed after XV days, and I treated it, and it healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the miracle was that he did not die, and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where there is none, nor any medicine; and I put on cotton wool II times a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two ways of sewing: take the needle, and thread it from the outside part to the inside; when it has pierced the flesh, keep the thread tight, so that the stitch is straight; then tie the thread off, and leave it once on one side, and pick up again on the other side, until the stitch is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, which is properly done by Galien, if it is so as that there is a font where the two parts come together naturally, and apply one of the heads to the other head in this manner: pierce an eye or a head of wool near the mirror, and make the needle go through that part only, leaving the two heads of wool; then turn the needle, and make it go through from the outside part until it comes to the inside, by the two heads of wool; then make it go through one and the other from the outside part until it comes to the inside, in the two other heads of wool that are on the other side; and this is the muddled way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galien says this word, and no one testifies, that we must sew the belly to two needles, or each thread; and you must push one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew with corroded needles; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the sewing is more painful than any other belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as that of the other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just as the flesh has been moved, then bring back the intestine and the pit; then put on the powder with care, and if the flesh has been moved, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound opens again; and draw out the thread, and let the skin be sewed up, and the mirache; then cure the wound like the others until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to open again, cotton wool, and stir it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	Because you have no other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound will communicate with the main members, then you should wet another light one in oil of thyme or oil of rose, and put it around the joints, and wrap the bandages; and if it feels pain or putrefaction in the balls, and often happens, then let the black wine cool, and more certainly the putrefaction comes to the intestine; and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine called "jejunum" cannot be healthy when it is newly born, and this is because of the location of the veins that are in it, and because of the subtlety of all the body, and because its nature is close to that of a newborn.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the small intestine jumps out of the wound, put it back in the same way as you would an intestine, while it is still fresh; and if it has become old and has turned yellow or black, then find the location that is black, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the two bones, and hang them from the side of the wound to the far end so that the extraction can be performed when the small intestine jumps out, and the wound bleeds.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ripped and the wound is small, one can restore it in some places, because I saw that some very young ones were navered or stabbed by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was defecation and wind; so I applied treatment according to what I could find, and did not stop being subtle until it was healed, and I closed the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	Et when I saw him stitch up, I doubted that the patient would be sick in his belly; and there was no evil, but delay in better dispositions, and feasting and drinking; and said none of the experimenters that when he has a little wound in the intestine, that he must bind it in some way: take a thread from great testicles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on the two lips, so that she draws her mouth out; and then he covers his head, and this holds so that he can't unbind, then puts another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is all closed; and sews up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief wound is in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can bind the intestine with a thread cut from the intestine of a beast in some way: take the head of this thread of intestine that is well shredded, and then tie it to the head of this thread of fine linen twine twisted, then wind the thread around the needle, and sew up the intestine, and tear it back at the rupture; and this method of stitching with threads is good only according to the way of the fiance and hope; and if the wound is great and wide, most certainly when it is in one of the small intestines, there is no cure or medicine except fineness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or where it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	That said, all wounds and abscesses, once they have healed, are called "fistula" in general, and most importantly when they have scarred and closed up with a hair-like thread.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And the fistula is according to the green, hard and white nodation, where there is no pain, and it is also chewed like a peck of a bird; and it never breaks clearly, and sometimes thick, sometimes thin; neither does it break, and that I have spoken of in the division of wounds, that all wounds, unless healed, and there is no cure, are only by one of the VIII causes: namely, the smallness of the wound or sore; or its badness; or because it is too hard inside, and on the lips, which does not allow a break to occur; or there is too much scabs; or the place is rotten, and the substance is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good for healing; or because it is of a pestilential nature; or because digestion and health are slow in that region, and run away by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs and cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or is necessary that I make you aware of the cure for fistula, which is made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Fistulas can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves, or to the liver, or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs, or spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and if it is partially broken, so that it comes to the principle member, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are in this way are difficult to heal, and there is only toil and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to its principle member, and you have engaged to cure it, and you see it clearly, then take a tent of rawhide or iron, if the fistula is straight, seek it; and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a thin tent of pliers, for the pliers bend themselves according to the curvature; and if the fistula has broken hands, and you cannot find it well with tents, then cauterize it with your hand, that you know whether there are bones or nerves, and it is completely healed, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and the place where he feels it; and when you have really known the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cauterize it according to what I have said, and remove the wronged and腐敗的组织; and then heal it until it is healed, and if the fistula is very deep from the right place, it is necessary that you cauterize it completely, as much as you can, then put wet tents in medicine water, and pour them on the top of the fistula until the medicine corrode the excess that is kept at the bottom; and then put oilements in janrain healing oil, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cauterize it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If in the nape or any of the main limbs you feel pain, as we have said; and if the bone is uncovered, and there is corruption and darkness, then the king heal it as long as the corruption is all over the bone, then cure it with healing balms until it is well; and if it is not well, take away the bow as before, knowing that you have not yet reached the end: if you discover it and wait until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this does not happen, know that the corruption is too deep, so you cannot come to it; if there is no other injury but to weaken by nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can pull it with pliers, if you extract it with the right instrument for this, and if there are many bones, pull them all together, but do not leave one behind; and if moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, cut it and moisten it and heat it, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, put something on the wound that will cause irritation and leave it there for as long as the bones are deformed around it; and then the bones will be easier to move; and if it is a large bone, like a leg or thigh, wait until all the bone is blackened, then open up the wound again; and if there is a lot of decay and it comes down to just the marrow of the bone; if it is worth doing and covering completely up to the point of decay, then mend it so that it holds together; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg, so that you may use that as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	He was an elderly man of about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that entered his body, so much so that the matter came to his leg, and there was a large abscess, and he had no obvious cause to operate on; but by their foolishness they operated so much that it corrupted so much of the matter that it became a fistula, and it came to such a bad state that everyone's body watered and was covered with moisture from the trunk; and many times I saw him treated over a two-year period, and there was no skill in the hands of those who treated him until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines he had been given, and how it was corrupted by the fistula. The color of his body became red, and his skin turned yellow.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put a tent in one of these apertures, and then searched all the apertures, and found that one came against the other on all sides of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I quickly went there, and filled one of the apertures with so much that I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corroded and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone inside; I knew what appeared to me to be the bone's corrosion, and took care that there was no other corrosion than that which I had noticed; and I began to heal the wound with medicines that took a long time, and I could not join it together. And then I started again, and discovered the bone in the same way as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and knew it, and then I broke it open, and bent over the joint; but I could not join it together as much as I filled an opening with a palm of the bone, and then healed it with medicines. And he was cured and tightly joined, and there was no need to heal the wound again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	Car for the evacuation of blood often, but it was completely healed, and gave birth in place of the bone a hard shell, and was of good disposition and did not harm nor opposite from all in all, nor air nor come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any place of the skeleton, then it should be done in this way: take a thread, and stretch it at the head of the bone that is open, and command anyone to extend it upward; and put another thread of another size larger than the first thread, and tie it above the shell that lies over the bone, and loosen the shell, so that you pull off the rotten shell, and uncover the shell on the place where you see or feel the corruption, and do so again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the nose is corrupted and does not open at all, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part, then uncover the whole nose; then put a hot coal on it, and then string the corruption from one part to the other, and let the string come out of the long part of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is in the joint, then cover the corrupted joint, and tie the bone where it is on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, then there is no other pain but that of covering; and if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or at the knuckle of the foot, then this is very painful, but nevertheless you must inquire about this corruption, how it opens; and purify it in all ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve do not oppose you; and know that the incision and the strings for covering these bones are many, according to the sit of the bones and the appearance of the bones, and their thickness and subtility, and their size and smallness, and their hardness; and for this it is necessary to arrange each instrument for each appearance of operation, and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; and imagine the instrument which you have need according to what seems right.
dou feu	Fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	If the dislocation is caused by heat, or if it is due to a fall; and when you have applied medicine to that corrosion, and it does not benefit, then cover that member up to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes from this life, or from evil, which is greater, of the failure of the member; and the signs are that the members become black, so that they seem to be burned by fire, and the corrosion moves from one member to another, taking hold everywhere; if you hurry to cover it up, and if it is due to the percussion of certain poisonous creatures, such as sea scorpions and spiders and others, then the corrosion comes to the head of the two bones, and you cover it, and do not give it space to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	If it comes up to the hand, then cover at the joint, so that the corrosion does not come up to the arm; and if it comes to the arm, then cover at the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death, and there is no remedy but the quantity of its virtue; and do this whenever the corrosion comes or goes: if it comes to the first joint, then cover after the other joint; and if it comes or goes up the leg, then tie the member tightly at the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is nothing left for the patient but death; and the way of covering or sewing the member is that you bind it above and below with linen strips, so that the cloth does not touch the healthy part, and comes to the patient another wound and abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	Et si the decorremens de sanc comes when you operate, if you cauterize the site thoroughly, or you put on some powders that restrain it; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and cure it until it is healthy; and I will tell you what happened to the patient at home in some detail: he got a blackness that seemed like fire burning, and this corrosion came first in order from the foot, so much that it stained all the foot; and when the honourable man saw the corrosion, if he covered up the foot with lead, he got well; and a long time after the corrosion returned to the place of the hand, and came to me, and I put on him things that cause percussion after the purification of the body, and I could not stop the corrosion; and he said that I should cut off his hand, and I did not want to do that, for I had hope of recovering the material; and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, because the virtues of man are weak; and he became despondent and returned to his land, and covered up his hand with lead, and got well; and I only told this story to show what should be done differently, if it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No one time comes abscess in the flesh, and lingers so long that it forms a great boil; then bursts and leaks, and leaps forth as a bull leaper, and lingers like a serf; and the skin which is above is also thin as a drape, and does not corrode at all until it reaches the bone or the nerve, and such a disease is called "health", and is not called "fistula"; but when it is so long that it comes to the bone by a perfect hole, then it is called "fistula"; and the skin which is above is also thin as a drape, and does not corrode at all, like our drapes; and does not burn for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you are sure that the skin will be infected, and corruption is not complete, and the skin is as thin as a drape, and does not burn at all, like our drapes; and does not corrode, take this medicine made of Egyptian herbs which is made thus: take oil and saltpetre and iron, equally, and put the herb in a vessel with fire, until the medicine is red, and becomes thicker as well; and then take it according to your need, and make it into water and honey, and clisterize the breast, and draw out the pus; and leave the medicine there for two hours, and then drain it by squeezing it; do this many times, until the breast is very white, and the wound is healed; and never clisterize with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, but take ashes from a vine's stalk, and pour water on them, and then let it flow, and clisterize it, until you know that the breast is very white; and if the patient cannot bear the pain, nor the Egyptian herb medicine or water of ashes, if you clisterize with honey and wine which has been made sweet, because the sweetness of honey has the property of whitening and washing, and the wine makes the patient feel better; and when you have done this, and are sure that the breast is very white, then clisterize it with what is born of char in it, and is that you squeeze plaster, and make it with oil of roses and wine; or clisterize it with some medicines and herbs, of which I have spoken, or treat with herbs; and if the wound is too large, and the caustic does not enter, then widen it a little with an iron, and put it in a tent of the Egyptian herb, or basilicon herb, until it is widened; and if the wound is too wide, so that the caustic can't get in, and if the hole where the skin comes out is above or below, cut or lower it to the place where it should be.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	Car when the breast is fully developed, if it does not hang down; and if you cannot cover the nipple as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way that the breast hangs down to its lowest point, for when the breast is fully developed, if it does not hang down, and if you cannot cover the nipple as you see fit, then arrange it in such a way: that the breast hangs down lightly flowing, leaving nothing of the breast uncovered; and take medicines that strengthen the milk production on top of the breast, and wrap them in linen sheets that cover the whole breast; then bind tightly around the armpit at the wide end of the nipple opening, because ointments should be applied to the other sheet according to the quantity of the opening, and place it over the nipple opening to tighten the breast, and do not remove the large sheet for after many days once; and the one who is on top of the nipple opening often removes to loosen the breast, and know what runs from the breast, whether it be poison or milk or enough or digested or undigested; and take care that the patient feels pain or no pain, and if there is an abscess or not, and how your medicine has spread in such a way that you see the nature that rises over the nipple opening, then know that the breasts are already firm, and come closer to them. And then remove it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you remove the wound, if you change another sheet, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if her breasts become swollen and uncomfortable after many days, know that her breasts are not yet ready.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poison becomes evident after a long time, do not despair of health because health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are some whose late healing of their wounds and those that do the opposite; and if breasts become swollen and uncomfortable after many days, know that they are not yet ready; and if they lag behind and are stiffened, take medicine that is dried in substance and dried in virtue, as if it is completed, for there is a great deal of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take care to dry it well and use it with rose oil, and rosé it with good red wine that is equal in substance; then confit it and use it; and in that same way make honey cooked by adding it to a mixture of honey when it has been extracted from the fire; then apply it to the breast, and never administer it without arnica, or myrrh and incense, and grind them together and powder them on the honey as I have said, and use them; and if the cure is prolonged, and this cure is not used, know that corruption has spread, and produces an impression in the bone, or hard members, or limbs; if he cures a fistula with this cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the toe of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	is a blister that comes out of the nail bed of the hand, or foot, or perhaps comes out elsewhere; and when it has broken open, and we do not take care, then it comes to be a blister, and burns and stings so much that it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps reaches all of it; and there is corruption until the bone, so much that it hurts strongly, and the two sides are wide apart, and the color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, then you must cut off all the excess that has been reserved of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauterization is a great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy; and if the nail is pressing upon the flesh, and beginning to hurt, and blisters, then you must put on the root of the nail what stops the nail from pressing upon the flesh, and cut it off high up, and carefully and lightly cut off that bit of skin, and put on top of it burning and corrosive medicines to kill all of it; and then treat with oil until it is healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	Et si la corrosion est dans l'os, alors le traiter avec force, car tant que l'os est corrompu, il ne peut guérir ; et si tu vois le os corrompu, alors traiter comme dit ci-dessus, puis guérir jusqu'à ce qu'il soit guéri ; et s'il est blessé et douloureux, et sent une grande douleur, alors il convient de le guérir en premier. Puis couper l'ongle avec un marteau, en coupant à travers au-dessus, et veiller à ce que la coupe ne vienne pas jusqu'à la chair qui est sous l'ongle, car le malade ressentrait trop de douleur ; et s'il arrive, alors mettre quelque chose qui apaise.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	La douleur du sourdoit de la main
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Le doigt qui pousse dans la main de certains hommes est entièrement charnu, et par occasion il y a un os, et jamais une ongle, et aucune fois la racine de la jointure nait dans aucun d'eux.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Whoever is born with two legs who does not move, and whoever is born with a double joint who will probably move; the size of the one who is chiseled is so light in some way: cut it off at its root with a broad chisel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Whoever is born at the root of the double joint needs to be carefully treated; if you hold him tight.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In whoever is born with an odd number of legs who must be cut off at the hip: first cut around the hip joint neatly up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable knife, and finally treat it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together in two pieces are those that, by birth or by injury, or by fire's scorching, or similar things, come to be.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If you cut off the joint that needs to be joined again according to its natural form; and place between two cloths or drapes wet with oil and rosin so that it doesn't stick together; or place between two thin pieces of cloth, until the joints are joined together properly, as is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	She begins to touch any of his two with the palm, so handle it like this is right.
des vils	of disease
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The vis are very big wrapped packages full of superfluous melancholy, which come in many parts of the body; and there is more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should not give him any kind of purification treatment, and then cure it from the base of the nose.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron should be done according to two ways: one is that you handle it, and drain the black blood; and the other way is that you loosen the vein, and drain all of it.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting should be done according to this way: first cut the leg of the patient with a sharp knife, until the large vein is reached, then tighten it and drain the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient can bear; and then release it, and order him to wash his meat with black ink; and start again with the evacuation and healing when the veins are empty, and dry for the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation of the text line by line: 
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if it is seen bent and twisted and wrapped up together, and it is not straightened, as we have said, then it is necessary that you tear it crookedly, but not cover it; and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	And the shape of iron where one covers the vis if it is twisted, and does not cut, so that it covers the vein; and it is a large twist because if it were thin, it would cover the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm places where no grass or trees grow, and in the ground where there is no moisture; and by chance it may grow elsewhere than in the legs, and the pus that comes from it comes from within the skin, as if it were crawling and twisting between the skin and the corse.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that an extremely great inflammation comes in the leg, then the places change, and it begins to come out of its place, just as the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And if the signs of the beginning of this wound are that an extremely great inflammation comes in the leg, then you should wrap a piece of cloth around it from one third to two thirds of the way up, and cover it up, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time it comes off, if it is too long, cut a piece off and wrap it again, covering the rest; do not wrap it tightly at its base, until it is all out; because if you do, it will enter the chest, and cause an abscess and corruption there; so that it is necessary to treat it little by little, until it is gone entirely; and this wound is treated when it is five or six hands long, or a good length; and I have seen it come from a length of ten hands; and when you cover it up, if it raises or protrudes, and pierces all the way down to the bone, so that everything comes out; and empty the matter inside, and apply medicines to the abscesses every day, then cure it as you would an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never use this hand to cut in the joint of the foot, or there the foot, and it comes out badly, and from which rain is needed; then cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	The hair should grow between the hide and the horn;
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "buff disease," because it often affects buffaloes; it is a small worm that arises between hide and horn, going up and down all over the body, feeling warm as it moves from one member to another, until it wears away the hide, and then disappears; and is infected with pus of some kind of humors, like worms, snakes, bugs or maggots; and one doubts about its malice, because when it goes through the body, and reaches the head, it comes to the oil, perhaps enters, and destroys the oil; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it cure and extract, if you can only do so when he is: then it is necessary that you place the head above and remove it with a strong, tightly wound ligature; then pick it up and extract it forcefully, and let it fall into the tray perfectly; and if you don't, apply fire cauterization to him until he dies; and the greatest harm he does is that he corroded the oil, as we said; and if you see his head coming close to the oil, then remove the wax from the socket completely, then pick it up and extract it forcefully; and it is necessary to use the patient's washings of solutions of medicinal substances for the bad humors putrid, and sear with meats corrupting putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	from pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members and moves from member to member; and I saw this one that I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to see a sick woman, and I uncovered her arm, and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm; then after a while, I felt it rise as high as a worm does in the shoulder, more quickly than anything else, as if it were alive silver when it cuts from one place to another; the pain left that place, and went into the shoulder, and then a little later corrupted all over the body, until it came to the other arm; then she told me that she was rotating again around her body, as I saw her.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled at how this woman moved her member from one to the other, for I have never seen such a disease in this way before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Anyway, I have often heard that people with this disease sometimes feel pain in one place and then in another, but I have never seen it as with this woman; and I thought that perhaps she had a hard body, and the veins uncovered, and because of this constant windiness; and I don't see it according to this reason for those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see how to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it comes out as we said, put the plaster on him and keep it in place, and then cover it with a bandage until it heals; cauterize the sore; and if you don't see any hair, make pills from rotten meat, serapin, and similar things.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	They are various, according to their appearances and according to the colors of their feathers when they fly.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	There are different types of arrows, according to their appearances and according to the colors of their feathers when they fly. They have large or small heads, curved or straight bodies, and some have wings. Some have two or more feathers, some are bent, some go through the body in one place or another; and some arrows fly in a particular direction without breaking any bones, or without hitting any organs: the brain, liver, stomach, pancreas, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When she dies and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: it is necessary that you free yourself from the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after several dispositions; and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely extracted, then draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	When the arrow pierces the bone and the pain is felt in the skull, and there is a fever that burns and a hot feeling in the ears and tongue, and spasms and confusion of thought, and vomiting; and perhaps it may affect the nose or ears; and perhaps it may cause loss of speech or voice; and when this sign appears, you should treat it, and extract the arrow if it has not already been extracted.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the sneeze when it comes is that it is near the left breast, and also feels as though it were stuck in something hard, not hollow; and perhaps the sneeze also moves like a bird's wings, with short black breath, and coldness and chills come, and fainting: so one has no doubt that death draws near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of a sneeze that doesn't involve the nose is that there is no foaming from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient's skin changes color, and he sighs loudly and shivers with coldness.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the sneeze comes in bed, then the little ribs ache; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the limbs move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the sneeze comes from the stomach, perhaps there is something coming out of the wound that isn't digested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow strikes one in the belly, and it goes through the intestine without a stop, there is no hope for the cure, nor for the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow strikes one in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and goes away, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, if it is made of face and neck and throat and shoulder and ajutoire and spine and forcele and cuixe and legs, and the limb that looks like it, are safe according to many arrangements.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it does not hurt, so that as I will tell you that it happened to me, do not make it differently.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to me that an arrow struck one in the neck at the root of the neck: I tried it, and removed it from the other side by cutting off the fat of the ear, and was healed without any pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And throw a arrow that it enters into the fat of the oil of paper of the rope, and the arrow was recovered, and I could not achieve but the point toward the wind, and it was an arrow of great color of a Turkish arch, completely light without ears; the game was sane, and no bad accidents came.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And throw an arrow into the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears; I knew the barbs, and I took care to aim well, and the Christians were sane.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And throw an arrow into the back or belly of a man, thinking that he would die; and then he passed 30 days, so his condition did not improve; I cut on the arrow, and engaged it, and shot it, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you want to cut a hole in the chest or back, and the wound is sewed up above; and hold the arrow inside, and do not disrupt its natural dispositions, nor do you find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And I know another man, to whom an arrow was shot through his face, and the wound was sewed up; and he held it in this way so as not to suffer great pain; and many others too.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And I saw a prince's man who had an arrow shot through his neck, and the wound was sewed up; he was slightly inclined to the left side; and the arrow was all pulled out After three days I was called to cure him.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I asked him to try all kinds of medicine, and he did not feel it; but he felt pricking and pain on the right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of an arrow. I put on top of the plaster with a medicinal and digestive atrative, so that the plasters do not swell; and I saw the plasters of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I put the plaster on for a long time, and resolved the wound quickly, and delayed it so that the patient felt the arrow inside his neck; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put on the medicine that corroded acutely for a long time, until it was opened, and tested it, and felt the head of the arrow which hardened at the spot; then I strengthened the opening of the wound with that medicine, until the head of the arrow was clearly visible; and I passed three months, and then the wound healed so well that I took out the pliers from one side and the other, and it would not come out; therefore I ceased to be subtle and to invent methods of instruments, until I took it with pliers well made, according to what its shape will come at the end of this chapter, as I dragged it, and healed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And I saw that the cartilage from the nose cannot be restored; so I restored it, and the wound was sewed up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Do you wish to speak of the extraction of arrows, so that you apply your cure to those things I have not mentioned, for the book cannot address everything; but master surgeons do well with a small number of things, and those present and failing, trueve nine work, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign objects which come in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that the arrows are in the limbs or they are stuck, following II manners: or through the place where they enter, or through another part; and the one which enters through that place is a sticking arrow in the flesh, and never enters once now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if she does not jump now, let her wait until the flesh is rotten inside, and let the issue come out; and also if it has gone into the bone, and she cannot come out, if she waits like this for some days, and every day she makes a small hole; and then she jumps, and if she does not jump, if she punctures all of the thin flesh inside, until the flesh inside is enlarged, and then follow her.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow has gone into the bone of the head, and goes up to one of the lungs of the brain, and some of the accidents that I have said can happen to the patient: do not extract it, but let it be even after a few days, because if the arrow comes up to the vitals, then it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if an arrow has gone into the bone only, and does not come up to the vitals, and the patient stays without a bad accident for some days, then it is an instrument to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is stuck in place and cannot be moved, then administer hot tar, as I told you; and then treat the joint until it is healthy again.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is lodged in the neck so that it cannot be seen, look for it with your whole hand; and if you feel it, take it with a suitable tool; and if you cannot pull it out because of the wound, cut the skin and tissue, and break or bend the arrows so that you can draw them out; and carefully do not break the arrow so that you draw it out more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at once, then let the joint between the arrow and the flesh rot; then draw it out, for extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	Et s'il est accablé par le sang, administre ce que nous avons dit de la cura dans son onguent; et sois prudent quant à l'incision du nerf et de la veine, et met avec soin comment tu peux extraire la saillie sans danger, rapidement ou lentement, fermement ou vigoureusement; et place le malade selon la forme qu'il avait quand la saillie lui est entrée, car c'est le plus grand secours qu'il y ait, et s'il ne peut pas, met-le selon ce que les signes te montrent.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	And if it is struck by a bolt from another place, or if the skin is not broken where it enters, or if the curd is swollen in that place, which one can see or feel apparently: then cut up as high as the pliers can take hold, and then extract it: do not wait any longer.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, so turn your hand round, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then take it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, so leave it still, and then begin again the extraction until it comes out; and if there is a nail in it, so pound it with all your strength; and if it is caught, and you have an awl, so place the point of the awl where the nail enters into the handle of the instrument; and then pound it out, and if the nail has been knocked into the handle of the instrument, so pound the instrument at the point where the nail goes in; and then pound it out, and if the nail is knocked into the handle of the instrument, so pound the instrument with the awl's point.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, so it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is; if you can, then treat the wound as it should be done.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow enters anywhere in the belly or bladder or side, and is close to an organ, then cover it up, if you can; and beware of covering the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, for this is a job; and heal it until it is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pliers that are used to remove arrows are similar to an eye, and this is how they should be made:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways to do it: big, medium, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the bit used is also like the beak of a bird, to bite into the tip of the arrow, as this is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the pliers for driving in and drawing out; and thus it should be made.
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the chest common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins from which one is cured are XXXI, of which there is a head XVI; that is to say: II batons which are behind the ears, which are called "herbeches"; and the II arteries which are in II temples appearing; and the II veins which are in II arms of II hairs, which are called "aspirations"; and the vein which is above the forehead; and the vein which is at the head of the child; and the II gynaeciums which are in the neck; and the II veins which are behind the lips above the mouth, these are the veins which are called "augerichs"; and the II veins which are behind the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	Of the veins from which one is commonly cured are V in each arm: one is the cephalique, and it runs along the left side of the chest, and it is called by the common people "vein of the head"; its member is called "fast" and consists of the cephalic and basalic; and it is called by the common people "vein of the wrist"; and the basalic, if it is on the right side of the chest, is called by the common people "vein of the belly", and is placed on the fascicle, and this is the one from which one is cured, which opens clearly on the pulse.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the little finger is the vein that is between the thumb and the index, and if it has II rains; and in the leg and where the foot are III veins: one is as it is dislocated from the corbue of the left coast, and the second sophene that is at the ankle of the right coast; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are III veins dislocated from those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	And the little finger is the vein that is between the thumb and the index, and if it has II rains; and in the leg and where the foot are III veins: one is dislocated from the corbue of the left coast, and the second sophene that is at the ankle of the right coast; and the vein called "nesse", which is in the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg are III veins dislocated from those. The savior of these veins that are after the ears, so as to help the old catarrhs, and has migraine; and the quality of the savior, so as I tell you, is that you return the chief of the sick, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then extract the disease from the neck by a screw, as long as the II veins appear behind the ears in II dependent lews: then take them both, and where you feel the pulse move away from your side, sign it with the index; then take the lance, and pierce it out of the vein until it reaches the bone, then let your hand go all the way up the vein, and cut and the skin and the vein well II times on each side, and make it bleed as much as you see; then extract it and tie it up, as long as it is healed; and I have said before about incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The two arteries that are in the temples, if they become old and slow, and with a custom of tears used to the eyes, and at the root of the eyelids; and the quality of the seer is such as I say: that is, that the patient should stretch his neck until the two veins appear open; and feel the thin hair on your two cheeks, then sign of the cross on them; then lay the scalpel behind on your two index fingers, and pull the vein upward from behind, and cut it off, so as you did in the two other veins, and make the blood flow according to your need; then remove the patient, and put your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then cover them with cotton; then let it form again, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of their wrapping and extraction, or beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The medical condition of a headache at the base of the skull is as bad as that of an old facial disease, and also causes migraines and blindness. Its quality is such that when the patient twists his neck, the vein appears; then take the instrument called 'fosseur', whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and hold it with your hand or another object, and let blood flow according to the amount that you see; then loose the patient's neck, and tie up the vein as long as it is healthy, and never work with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not good that the flame be too hot; and the vein has to be cut across, for the bone is near, and the flame might break if it is too fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The veins on the two sides of the neck that are near each other assist in the treatment of tic, blindness, and the eye; and their quality is such that when the patient twists his neck, he does not need to tie it up, as we have just said; then cut them, and also cross-cut one with a long flame, a little wide, because there is no hair.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if it is a subtle flame, by chance let it break; then make the blood run, as much as you need, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	And if the blood from the vein flows so that it is almost like water, and suddenly comes fever, and sudden diseases of the face, such as headaches and jaundice that come into the face, even when it is old; and the quality of the blood is such that the patient strains his throat, then he holds his child's nose with your left hand, and put the subtle flame long, and let it enter the space that is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well on its own, and it will start to run now; and do not go too far in perfection, and make the blood run according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is almost restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
de la sainie des leivres	of the medicine of the animals
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	For the medicine of the veins of the lips above helps to heal in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cuts of the lips, and of the baby and the womb.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of the medicine is such that it sits comfortably before you, and holds its neck as I have said; then turn the lip and look at the veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by this that they are black, and because the veins are small black: so take each in turn, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt, so take the largest of the two, and also do the same to the veins above and below, for it is a middle manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	For the medicine of the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The patient should let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins that are commonly treated are done so according to two methods: either by poking deeply with a sharp tool, or gently cutting them, which is called 'anasil'; and they are deep and precise according to the size and stretching of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame is sharp and broad, as you see it.
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And the skill is to open the flat veins that are full of thick blood and trouble; and this is the shape of the olive flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more subtle pointed, and is for saving the veins subtlety, where there is a subtle citrines blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cure for the basilical vein, which is one of these veins, is such that it helps diseases that are located in the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen; and it comes to the healer that he heal with bloodletting, and that he cauterize the artery that is located outside.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cauterize the artery, and the blood comes out, so that it comes to stop bleeding, as I said; and it must not be grasped by the flame, but cut off with a knife, like a goat's horn.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilical does not open clearly, then you must cut it off, and change it with another one; or you want any rain from it, or you heal in its place the vein by cutting off the arm: it opens clearly; and he cauterizes with fire, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you know the spot of the vein, then it is also necessary that you extract the arm, that you touch the spot until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot behind, and then tie the arm, and cover the vein with a flame; and be careful not to hurt in the artery when you see the spot infected, for it is from the artery. So be careful.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it come out on top as the urine of a child, and the vein is red and thin, know that it is from the artery: hurry up then, and put your finger on it for a long time, and then take off your finger when the pain subsides, which often happens; tie the arm, and let it be like that, and do not move the patient; and be afraid, and do not move it until it is well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if he does not get better, and you go to him, and the medicine is not present, if you cut the artery while it is open because the head of the retentive is there, and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a peel of fig, and make it, and take one of the halves and put it well up to the other day; if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, cure it with the powders that stop blood, and the stopping of blood should not be in many situations because of the small size of the wound, and the strength of the vein of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The health of the vein in the middle with the help that it treats blood from the head above and from the base, for it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said; and it belongs to the doctor that he warm himself by the nerve that is inside, and if he overdoes it by perfection, he will burst the nerve, and it will swell and its health will be damaged, and perhaps it cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person because of its subtility, then you must cut it with an anesthetized instrument; and avoid that nerve within your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nails, then cut it short.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	And if there is a vein between the two nails, then cut it short. The cure for a headache caused by a vein is to draw blood near the temple, and to let it flow; and it is better to strike at the olive flame or the marten flame, because it is the most effective treatment for all veins, since it does not affect the nerves or arteries.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is better to try the lighter method first and not get upset if it fails the first time, but then start again; and perhaps at some men's veins will swell up the first time, but it doesn't matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the bloodletting is according to your opinion.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it should be done only to maintain health and ward off future diseases; and it must be done in one of the three veins: the head, the groin, or the base of the neck; and it should be done early in the morning, or at noon, or in the evening after eating, when the sign of fullness appears; and it should be done on the first day or third day of the month.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n'a point d'oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc'a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc'a septime.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	The patient who is healthy and free from disease does not have a determined age; however, it is appropriate to begin treatment for adults during the hours of day or night, at all times, and it is not appropriate to treat children until they are 12-13 years old, nor women except those who have been pregnant for four months up to seven months. It is also not appropriate to treat the elderly who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone is to be treated, in any way, it is appropriate to determine the intestines of a light enema, if there is a retention of mucus, so that the veins do not draw in the superfluous foul matter harmful to the principal members; nor should they be treated who are too dehydrated from food, or who are alcoholic, as long as it lasts, nor ydropics; and one should not treat after a colic passion, vomiting, abdominal cramping, excessive sexual activity, excess work, staying up late, fasting, and anything that weakens the virtue, whether by weapon or dagger; then slowly the humors, if he is fat, because of food, drink, and medicine, if there is a reason for it; then enter or bathe, if nothing harms him, to gradually reduce the fever, and treat the hernia from the back with care, as we have said; and keep that day from work, excess, lust, and similar things; and be modest and orderly, and let the surgeon who treats you be higher than the one who treats others, and rub his arms twice or three times, then remove the hernia by means of a knot, because when it is too tight or loose, it cannot stand; and then rub the surgeon's hand with his own hand, until the veins swell, and can be felt; then moisten the surgeon's hand with the flame of a small drops of old oil, then put his thumb of his left hand on that vein where he is to be treated, that the vein does not hurt and fail to be cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if he opens it for the first time, it is good; and if not, then begin again a little bit more of that place where there is swelling or pain.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if his arms are swollen and the patient hopes for it, let him rest for a day or two, and do not bandage the arm: perhaps it will swell up as much as you see; but, if you doubt, do not hesitate to treat it immediately; and if the wound is small, so that the pain does not go away with just pressing it, then, in that case, I recommend treating it without hesitation; and, when the arms are swollen, bandage them. For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the arm swollen, then do not hesitate to treat it, and put a little oil on it, because it soothes the pain in that area, and is soothing in that place where the oil is; and administer the oil to each wound that you treat, to stop the flow of blood; and, if he also has tremors and faints, when he puts it on the arm; but apply it very gently when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if one comes with a large abscess that happens many times, most especially when it is not cleaned except at this time where the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and place a wet sponge in water and in silk a little warm, and hold it for an hour; and it comes that you do this after the escape of blood from the vein, and if it stays in its place after some days no color or green, so it does not harm him; and if you see, put on anything of aloe or mirrremade into juice of calamus, monstrosity, or similarity.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance occurs at the cleaning of the temple: so put your hand on it, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of your hand, then this is the appearance of evil.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Skip then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance in the absence of the artery; but make it a dry plaster to harden the place, and then heal it with other healing, as long as it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And according to each person's quantity of virtue, and the color of blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it is red; and if you see a lump, let it flow until it thins out; and if it is too thick, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And for those who are weak and outside, and have a need to extract blood, let them make a larger wound, and let the flames be wide; and for those who are strong, do the opposite, and let them save themselves often, and let them heal by cutting across, not by stabbing; and this way of healing is preserved from the decay of blood and the swelling of nerves, and it is better than long healing without injury.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose course requires healing, give them moist food in apple juice; if they are heated, heal them three times or four times; and if they have a cold complexion, moisten them before the healing with juice of grapes, or honey syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and sweet syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he is ill to the point of blood loss, after the exudation of blood, it is necessary that he swallow beer and aromatic syrup and use other things we have spoken about in the chapter on the treatment of syncope for the purpose of evoking a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he vomits up his food or is ill at other times, as often happens when he is very sick, that he gets better little by little, depending on the amount of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he vomits up his food after the first sickness, and he has a strong pulse, then he gets better seven hours after the first sickness, or nine hours.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he is sick in another place, he must get well in two days or three.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For he has blood in his body that makes the pulse feverish; if he has to draw out a large quantity, and widen the artery so much that he spits up food; then you must take all the conditions for sickness, and put your hand on his pulse when he is getting better, so that death does not come out of the vein, and this happens many times when the person is careless; and do not consider whether the arm needs to be moved or not, for it would be wrong; but leave it until he is better a second time; or you point the flame at the spot until the blood that is frozen in the artery comes out, and put a little salt water on it, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, leave it alone and do not constrict it, until the abscess has settled.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if need be, drain the blood a second time, whether it is in the same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein that runs through the arm is connected to the vein at the base of the neck; for it is composed of the same blood.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way to treat this wound is such that the patient holds his hand in hot water until the feverishness goes away; then let it rest properly, so that the vein appears clearly, then sew it across now, not wide nor long; and let the sutures be close together, and just below the joint of the hand, and if he cannot move it, do not put it back into hot water, for we use it more in a fever than when it is cool; and the wound from this vein is more cured than any other wound, as there is no artery or nerve involved.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for right-hand salvature is very effective for liver disease; this is how it is done: remove the hand, and dip it in hot water until the vein is seen; then cut the artery with a knife at every joint; do not be too careful, for the nerves are all exposed and bare; after that, put the hand back into the hot water, if it gets frozen in the wound, and cannot be removed.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated for as long as necessary, put oil and wax on the vein to hold it tightly together, and do the same for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The treatment for left-hand savour is good for mouse disease; and do the same as I told you to do for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The treatment for the foot is good for all kinds of disorders of the body, such as diseases of the joints, and also for the feet and legs, old diseases, and similar ailments.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of his health is such that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs it on the vein until it stops beating, and lies on top of the joint of the foot; and the vein if it is at the ankle, and goes up the leg with much rain; heal then where there is more rain, or at the ankle, that it may not hurt.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal on the foot, be careful of the nerves that are exposed, and heal it by turning as well as by cutting; and let the flame die out.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if he cannot pull them out, put the foot back in water, and let the vein well drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if he heals the wrong way the first time, start again the second time above a small hole, because the leg is hot; do not doubt about nerves, as we have said, and do so with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its blood runs to the pain in the thigh when it is time for birth.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of this vein is that the patient goes or bathes, and strips off from above the ankle three joints by twisting, because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, so you should move it in all ways that you can, and crossing over; and it is better to cut it than to twist it, for the blood is up, and it is very full of hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not open it, so that the rain of the leg that opens or closes at the foot, and turns towards the small side, and protects yourself from the wind; and make it run so much with the pain that you see, and then unlace the bandage, and put on cotton and hold it fast; now he is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	The suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	are made of horns, or bone, or glass; and the suction is made in two ways: by injuring and drawing out blood, or without injury.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	This text describes the construction and use of suction cups, or 'ventouses', in two ways: by injuring and drawing out blood, or without injury. The text also specifies that these suction cups can be made from a variety of materials such as horns, bone, or glass, and that they are applied to different parts of the body, including the head, neck, shoulders, arms, legs, and feet. It further emphasizes that this treatment should not be used for all medical conditions, but rather only when "all the body is empty".
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if because of the necessity of disease it is necessary to fasten, or by custom, if we administer each hour in the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in each period; for there are such who, when they need to fast, become very heavy; and those who do not eat and drink, and become pale and thin, and have darkness in their eyes and heads, and a drop of blood in their mouths, and their tongues are gone, and they are thirsty for blood; and if there are such who dream, and see by no food or drink or death or similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we saw these signs, and most certainly when it is the middle of the month, we order them to fast after three hours from day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The cure for the headache due to the temperature of the head ... which comes with the eyes, and it is not useful that this be done after the whole body has been evacuated; and this fasting is appropriate for those who are of a cold complexion in general or who have a fever, because it does them great harm; and it is not useful that it be done by those who have to stay up late at night, nor those who have a cold head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from it often become dizzy, and for this reason one should put the cup a little lower down due to the doubt of dizziness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	And the suctioning of the neck is in place for the recovery from the headache and the base of the skull, and therefore it helps at extraction of the pituitous fluid, and at splitting of the larynx canal, and generally, and at repletion; and it should be gently pushed back, because if it holds too firmly, then there will be dizziness or upset stomach or pain.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	And the suctioning of the neck is in place for the recovery from the headache, and it causes blindness and headaches, and strangeness, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is in place for the extraction of the fluids of the base of the skull; and you must command the doctor that he express his hand in order to put it on, that he does not hurt the artery, and does not cause a sudden loss of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The windings of the mouth cause illness in the mouth and decay of the gums and similar diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the place of the taste buds of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The windings of the shoulders cause a disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The windings of the arms cause as much pain as three veins in the arms, for they damage those large veins; and instruct the patient that he not too tightly bandage them, since their muscles are naked and prone to swelling and hardening.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The wind that is on the back causes as much pain as the bleeding from the fundament, and similar diseases; and it is necessary that the wind be strong and dry, for it has a duty to milk well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it would cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The ventouses of the legs should be kept open, for they draw blood from all the body, and are equivalent to the ancient pains of the reins, and of the marasmus, and of the bladder, and take away the floridness; and are in place of the two sophenes, and of the two cheville joints, but nevertheless they weaken the body after long use, and bring on a paumosis in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to put on the ventouses is that you should first make them empty, and quickly suck, and then place them carefully, and move them evenly, and keep doing this until you see the red and swollen place, and feel the heat of the blood; then stop, and remove the ventouses, and take care in the disposition of the bodies, for there are some who have a tender flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to cut once only, and to make deep wounds, and to suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if he is thin outside, he should hit twice: the first time to thin out the vein for thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if he is very fat outside, he should hit a third time; and when we want to drain blood little by little, we should squeeze it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to drain blood, let us start often; and if he is fat, he should be struck perfectly, and the end is such that the keur [blood vessel] is broken suddenly, and you cover yourself with oil of vitriols and dissolving: if it is in spring water, of violet oil, or of sweet almond oil, or of cucumber seed oil; and if it is in autumn water, of watercress oil, or of lily, or of chamomile, or other.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take olive oil, or balm, or anise oil, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person with the injury is old and has wide joints, there is no need to put oil on it, but it must be washed after the windification of rosewater, or cold water, or water from mulberries, or water from cucumbers, or porcelain water, or other things like that.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who are affected by moisture, if they rise in such water, or in water from myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And for those with thick surplus, they rise in old wine, or water from sycamore, or anise seed decoction, or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not good to be treated by suction before or during the bath, but an hour or two after the bath; and one should not sleep after windification, but when it is time to windify, then windify and when it is finished.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard those who are sick with colic, and let them not be too hot and inflamed; it is necessary that they eat cold things, such as pomes, grapes, leeks, and similar foods; and drink small amounts, and ride a cart, and moist meat.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion should drink honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is neither new nor old, and small amounts of food, and small birds and pigeons; and it is necessary to give some men triple or musk before or after wind, in order to strengthen the limbs; and make the body warm, but it is not necessary for everyone who is hot to drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The venesections that do not hurt are those put on the liver, and on the kidney, and on the podagra, and on the belly, and on the bladder and the reins and the hinch; for this limb does not feel pain when it is put on, but it is done to draw blood from one limb to another, as we put on the breasts when the disease is in them; so that the viscosity that is in the limb is drawn off, as we fill the venesection with hot water or with water in which herbs have been boiled; and they are not filled together, and never filled with pure water, but with water in which there has been a fire.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup is administered to fire thus:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	It should be of two hands wide and half a palm deep all around, and have a small hole in the middle about the size of a needle, as for piercing with a needle, and made of wood or bone, so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the limb; and in the middle should be a wooden or iron crossbar for holding a claw grip, and there should be both large and small ones according to the disease and age of those who take them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of old people, and those of thin people from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup onto the limb: take the claw grip of wax or thread, and put it onto the middle of the suction cup across the crossbar, so that the clarity is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; and then one places it onto the limb, and the two should be on the hole that we have said, so that when one pulls, if there is steam, and one removes the suction cup; and one takes the thread as before, and one renews it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the case of a ventose that has been contaminated with pleurisy, there is no water or hole, and it is only contaminated when it is completely dry, and is placed on the limb with sufficient force; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	In the case of a suction cup that has been contaminated with pleurisy, there is no water or hole, and it is only contaminated when it is completely dry, and is placed on the limb with sufficient force; and this is its form: There are no cups that can be used for members or that cannot be used due to their small size, like lips and gums, and similar things; and in leather of a horse, if there are two or three holes, and others similar; and the quality of using them is that when you find cups that are in clear water without danger, you take them; and put them into clear water, as long as they are familiar, and do not have anything in their stomachs; and then cure with a suction cup and then rub the member until it turns red, and put the cups on; and when they become clean and dry, if it is possible to use a suction cup, you put it on, for that is worth more after.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	Se ceu non, si leve le leu d'aisil, et puis d'aigue, mout bien, et puis l'espreint; et se li leus saine trop apres lou cors des sansues, si moille i drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchies; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broie ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu'il soit estenchies; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu'elles s'aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	If not, lift the joint from there, and then with fresh water, very well, and then press it; and if the joint is too far out after the neck of the sinew, so wet a linen cloth in cold water, and put it on, as long as the sinews are dampened; and if the sinews increase, so put crushed vitriolic glass or gall, and similar things, as long as they are dampened; or you put on the joint half of peeled peas, and leave them as they roast at the joint, now they will be closed; and if you need more, take other sinews.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This is the translation of the provided text:
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	The chapters of this treatise are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are beneficial for fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Understand, o son of a carter, that the fine horse is bathed in this chapter, which has never been seen in any of the ancient books, nor have they read it; and for this reason the science has been lost in our land, for I have never found one good one; and I know nothing about it, except through the study of the ancient books, of which I have studied much, so that I have dealt with the science, and by experience, and by custom of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly depicted the shapes of the instruments that are prepared, as I did in these two chapters above.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore appropriate that we say in this book the sums of words and the chapters where the sagacious mind places his understanding, and remains on truth, so that those who are tested may learn and understand this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or strain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to save the sick person from part and other, if anything does not serve you, so as weakness of the corsage, or ensnare, or old; or his boots are too cheap, or too often; and bitter chaps, that is to say, cold jouds, and char of eye and of chevrills, and do not drink wine, nor bitter gruel, and do not fill yourself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, as long as you have no doubt about a hot aposteme, or an expansion of matter in the member; if the sick person comes back to his previous government which he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken nose begins to heal, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with meat that makes great fattening, or has viscosity, like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and beans, and peas, and dough of wheat, and eggs, and fish fresh, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For as soon as the heat is removed, the breaking must be delayed and postponed.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people cannot easily be mended or restored according to their nature by the drying up of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, as the bones of small children; but rather, heal the broken bone with large bones which join the limb together, as much as it was before; and do not stop at all from its work, and for this reason it is necessary to grow thick flesh, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that there are different kinds of fractures in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture at the top is different from the fracture at the foot, or at the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that goes up and another that goes down, as when the chisel cuts, or as the length of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break at all a small slit.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each has its own tool for restoration, and the appropriate tool according to what comes to mind in one's place; and it is known the break in the bone due to the turn of the leg, and open well by the side, and press with the hand; and when there is no twisting or change in the shape, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but there can be a curve, or a slit, or a small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If you do not move it with your hand but put it on medicine that comes next, and then hold it now slowly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the break that came in the middle, and there are the two parts separated, now put them to be even as well as possible, so that the abscesses come up; and if the abscesses come up, if he leaves for a day, as long as the abscess is calmed down; then he puts it equal to the mold that you can make it lightly and carefully, and know that the restoration of this one is lighter than the restoration of the one where there are pieces; then hold it, as it comes next.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if the extension of the two parts is hand or foot, or a small member, or two strings, or a string and your hand; put the member according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the members are healed, you remove by all means the additions in their places with the muses you can, and guard that through your work does not come to the patient's injury or pain; and well join the two bones of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well to the hand if it seems to you that it is not good: if it is well dressed, and do not strip it too much, and do not press it as those who make it with their work cause hot and contraction of the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the member is in order, instruct the patient to not move it, neither watching nor sleeping, turning or in any other way; and well guard that the member be so assured that he feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	Car when he feels no pain, not even a point, and the need to put him in a comfortable position so that he feels no pain; and you guard that he is placed correctly, that tortuosity does not come when he is restored; and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	You know that the broken members are diverse in size and in greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and appearances: it is necessary to wrap fabrics of soft and subtle linen; and those that are large, such as calf and leg: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard thread, for the wide threads embrace all the large member, and restrain it equally on all sides, so that there is no patch; then put light splints III or IV according to the member, and restrain it a little at every turn, and tie it tightly at every turn, so that you press a great deal of the sound part, then take another thread, and return to the broken part below the splint, and restrain it slightly, not too hard nor too lightly, as we have said in the first line about; then put between the splints of linen or fabrics, until they are all equal, then bind them well together, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is an abscess or an abscess, if you put something soothing on the abscess, and let it be like that for some days; then draw out on your pegs, and they are half a handspan long in width, or from a branch from which they are drawn, or from palm leaves, and they should be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And if there is a break or a breach, if you put something soothing on the break, and let it be like that for some days; then draw out on your pegs, and they are half a handspan long in width, or from a branch from which they are drawn, or from palm leaves, and they should be according to this figure: But it is necessary that the peg that one puts on the break be a little larger and wider than the others; and it is also necessary that it be as far away as it is necessary for the limb of smallness or greatness; then draw out on the pegs as you did with the first lieure, then tie them together with a thread in advance, as in the first lieure on the breach; tighter is better, less is not; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too thick nor too thin, and of linen; because if the thread is thick, such as I have seen from the works of foolish people who make their pegs from twine, it is a great mistake, for the lieure cannot be equal if it is too tight, and it should not be necessary that it have less than two inches of space between each peg.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is stabbed by the nails of the stars after extraction from his natural skin, then put on them a cotton wool or another rag so that he does not scar.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the bruise and the bandage is broken, I will describe the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not good to extract stars from all the broken members on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the members are large, it is not good to put stars on them before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess; and you should use the method of ancient embowelling to restore a fracture, a dislocation, and a torsion: and this is that you take flour which clings to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of water, and put on this confectio, not too thin nor too thick, and use it; and this is the common method of the embowelling to restore a fracture to many states, and most importantly to women and small children, for it is not good to be too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plaster for healing fractures, dislocations, and twists: take honey, myrrh, oleander, asafoetida, Arabic gum, and mugwort, all in quantities of X; mirth and aloe, in quantities of V; alchechil, in quantities of VIII; and reduce them to a powder, and mix them with egg yolk from an egg. The ointment made from this mixture is hot, so use it, because it is of good composition and restores broken bones quickly and effectively, and is useful for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plaster for healing twists: take mugwort and castor oil, both in quantities of X; myrrh and aloe, in quantities of VIII; acacia, in quantity VI; and armatic resin, in quantity X. Grind them well and mix with egg yolk or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method of plaster for joints and bones that have come out of place, to relieve pain and prevent injury to the tissue around them: take fresh cheesecloth and soak it in warm milk and oil, then apply it to the affected area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	It is better to use poultices than to apply direct heat; they are good for calming a hot abscess, and properly relieve pain.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of poultice to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves and leaves of the holly tree, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method of poultice for healing broken bones and reducing the swelling of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take the root of marshmallow, chamomile, violets, wheat, each one in part; grind them and mix with wine, and heat the members, or mix with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of poultice, stronger than the first, for healing an abscess that has become chronic and is healing slowly.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take the roots of marshmallow, flaxseed, borage, melilot, and sage, and flowers of chamomile and violets; each one in part; grind them and mix with salt water or sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Ypocras says in his book that one should not put anything on a broken member to restore it except tar made of wax and oil, and nothing else, and he says that it must be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on a broken member, to restore it, dry things a little warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to poultice that is good for wounds and pain: take flour and knead it with water, or feathers of goose or owl down, and linen thread, and twist it together, and make a poultice and put it on him.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then unloose it a little, and take care that the patient feels no pain or restlessness or swelling at the site; if so, hasten to unloose it, and warm the member now; and dip a light cloth, and an sponge in water, and dip it in water, and lift up the member, until the itching ceases, and the pain is eased; then leave it to rest for an hour, then put on another dry cloth, wet with hot water or oil, and tie it on a nut, as long as you are sure that the abscess is warm; and continue this treatment little by little until he is well.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is causing pain and inflammation and swelling, then you must apply poultices and bind it up, if it begins to heal as you have done at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if the member does not come out as we have said, nor should it be released except after three, four or five days, and never leave it for more than XX days, according to what is seen, until the break comes close to the shoulder, then hold back more strongly and increase the tourniquet's tension, as I have said before; and if you see that the member is drying up more than it should, know that there will be no recovery; therefore, every time you release it, wash it with hot water, and let it air for a little while; by this work, then stop the swelling on the member, and carefully tear away what is wrong, that restore the member correctly: this is bad, and if these are fearsome actions, I do not see any other remedy than to make it right.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many different ways of breaking, and there are various forms, and the causes are distinct; for it has breaks that are made by the impact of a sword, and the jaw bone all the way down to the hip, so as when one is cut or broken; this way is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts the bone from above, and this way is called "absolute" break; and there is a wound from such great or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impact inside, or a split, or of the jaw of stone, or of falling on stone, or similar.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating break, that approaches the tendon that is outside the bone, or it is on the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l'os ausi subtil com uns cheveux, et est li fendure petite, et por ceui est apelee ceste brisure "capillaire"; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l'os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And if there is a wound in the bone that is as delicate as hair, and the fracture is small, and for this reason it is called "capillaire"; and if the wound is caused by a stone, or by a fall, or by some other thing, and causes the piece of bone to go into the body, and the place where the bone was broken becomes so bent as if a smith were bending it over a cauldron; if it goes into the stone.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all kinds of fractures by traction on them, and inquiry into the tents, and by the rotten cart that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is caused by what happens when you uncover the bone and rub it upwards, thus creating a black fracture.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of fractures, take care of potential accidents that might occur with the patient, and if you see no bad accident, as vomiting, loss of understanding, extensiveness, paleness, fever, the eyes getting redder and redder, and other similar signs and symptoms in multiple situations, it is difficult to heal.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a potentially dangerous accident, and you hope for healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the newborn comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone within fourteen days at most.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in the foot, so that you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue of the bone does not decay, and the accident comes which we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the tissue that covers the skull, so it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and this is that you squeeze the head of the sick person, and uncover it over the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more than you can, and because of the removal of blood comes to uncover the bone, or abscesses, help him who has come, and is necessary that you fill the place with wet fabrics in oil rosin; and let the wound rest as long as the abscesses are calm, and be sure of the removal of blood; then begin to split the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you chop the narrow end first, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I put another in the same way as the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have different numbers of shapes, some short and others long, and pointed, and made of iron; and work quickly, so as not to cut the top.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, so that you pierce it at the back, so that you bring in shapes with awls, not completely through so that they go beyond the bone's edge, and should have above the tip a margin or a circle, so that it does not let the tip pass beyond the bone; and you need to have several, so that each comes to its place at the edge of the bone, so that you have awls for all the test; and this is the form of the three ways of making awls:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the bone is that you put the awl on the bone and turn it two times until you feel that the bone has been pierced; then remove the awl a little further away, and do this all around, then take the space of the bone which is between the teeth, and make it smaller than you can, and quickly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone with your hand, or with any of the tools that you have such as pincers, tweezers; and be careful not to touch the cervix nor the syringe.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if you see that you have retained sharp-edged metal which comes from the bone like an incision tool, but it should be softer and more delicate than the other incision tools; and if it does not remain anything small of bones or scales, if the bone is slightly bent with the instruments; then heal the wound with oil and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way to cauterize is that which Galen says, which is more effective; and he raises it very high, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you discover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens; and so when you have discovered that part, you put on the end of this lens-shaped incision tool, from which comes its form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one part, and this part is wet in both sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then hit with a small mallet above, so that you chip the bone slightly all around, and take great care of the chipping which is behind; if it is caught to the bone, then chip the bone slightly, for the bone hurts greatly, and causes fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce until the skin, and the bone is cut so little from above, and there are small pieces, then let it be roughened again with a sharp razor, and scrape off the scales with a fine one of which you must have several quantities, to administer in each place the most convenient, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you have a very sharp razor, and then a finer one, and do not stop doing this until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other cuts and fractures, you must provide treatment according to their appearance; and this is a thing that has not yet been answered by anyone who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, you should take a linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and dip it in oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth, double or triple, and dip it in wine and oil, and put it over the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so that you do not hurt the syphilis, then apply by turns a different linen cloth, and never let it rest on the wound for more than an hour; and leave it like this for a day or two, until the abscesses are well healed over, then remove it, and administer to it, as roots and flour of times, and powder of incense, and alchemical things, and similar substances; and make these things into powder, and put them on the wound, and administer immediately with dangerous medicines without taste; and see that the wound is completely clean, so that you do not leave the infection, nor do you let bowels gather on the skin, for as soon as bowels gather over the cloth under the head, if they corrode and rust, they bring great harm to the patient; because when you put something mordant on the syphilis, it burns above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take good care, so that no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, if there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blackness comes forth only because of the medicine that has been put on, which has virtue, then you should squeeze one part of honey and three parts of rose oil and glue it onto the wound; and then treat it in a way that seems right to you until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	You know that the two bones above are never broken one by one, for each of them is alone, because they are two; and that bone is cartilage, and it does not break unless it is bent or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two bones is broken, then you should put your little finger or nail on the bone, and make it equal to your index finger at its end, and at the back slightly, so that the bone regains its natural shape; and do it gently, and be careful so that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if it is broken in the upper part of the neck, and cannot return to its place, so you put a ray equal to the head of a small stick on top.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if it is broken on both sides, do this otherwise, and hurry to restore the first day if you can; but if not, after the seventh or ninth day, when the abscesses have quietened down, then bind the neck with linen bandages from head to foot, if the fracture is on one side.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind the other with the other, if it is broken; and let the bandages be so thick that they fill the openings of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And say that one should moisten the bandages every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me that this is good, but it must be that they are moistened in a mixture of ochre and powder of hollyhock, and then leave the bandage on, until the bone is hard and the joints hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And never put goose feathers in place of tent canvas, and if they are soiled with sheep wool, and the breach is held, and blows the disease to others; or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come while you are operating, so that you put cotton wet with oil or a drop of aquilone;
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not come, so put an ointment away from here, of flour of sisle and incense powder, cooked with henna of sheep's wool; then bind it lightly, not at all; and if the breach of the abscess is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments according to this; then sew the wound, and cure the things that have been infected, suddenly, as ointments and oils suitable for this; and if there is no wound within the abscess, then cure the tent, and put cow's wool, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the mandible
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible is broken and there is no wound, and the break is not very deep, and it is not broken in two, but only bent inside, so that it looks like a hook, then one should handle it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is fitting, if the break is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the sick person; and if the break is on the left mandible, then put your index finger of the right hand inside, gently push the break back into place, and make it equal with the other hand from the outside, and smooth it out.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the mandible is in two, then you should bring the two parts together, so that they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movement of the teeth is problematic, because of the break, then you should tie it with a gold, silver, or silk thread, and put it on the broken mandible, and put two double cloth thereon; and put a large carefully made piece of leather thereon, long and wide according to the mandible, and tie it tightly to the jaw bone, and command the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure has changed, let it rest on the third day, and then put back what has been changed; and put plaster on, with powder from the mill with much ash or flour of wheat, after you have taken out the cerote; and put on the lighter plaster, and if the plaster should stick, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it as long as it is healthy; often it is healthy in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if the abscesses burst, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and a wound together, do not break a piece of bone; if subtile ostéotome tools are suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces of bone, and there is no delay at all, if the wound is wide, put on it poultices suitable for that, to promote healing, until it is healthy.
de la forcele	Of the forceps
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	Of the forceps break several times before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three ways: or it is broken and dislocated in two, and there are pieces, and it is the lighter to restore; or there is a break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work so is when the break is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder joint that is broken with forceps; and the others extend the neck towards the part; then make the break even on both sides, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or knot.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	Et si tu as métier d'étendre plus loin, si mets desœuvrant l’épaule au malheureux une speire ronde de drape ou de lainne, et soit grosse selon ta nécessité ; et estantes et levantes la forcele, et éloigne la speire à ta main, afin que tu mettes égale la brisure, si comme il convient.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you have the ability to extend further, if you put a round staff under the shoulder of the sick person, or thick cloth or linen, and it is large according to your need; and raise and lower it, and remove the staff from your hand so that you place the break equally, as it should be. If you cannot take off the head of the staff at the end, for fear that it comes apart completely, it is appropriate that the sick person lie down on his back, and put the shoulder under one ear, and press down the ministers on the shoulder downward, until the bone of the staff is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break on your two sides, and if you find that it does not fit, it is appropriate that you split it; and draw the pieces out lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, take off the staff from this instrument, to save the sick.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it appears like a spoon, and is not a hair, and is also as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has II heads, so that you see it, and one is wide, and the other is narrow, just as the cut of the wound that you made when you broke the bone; and when you are sure that the abscess is hot, if the wound bleeds much, and the cut is small, or if you doubt about whether the abscess is hot, then bind the wound with drapes and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if you dip it in oil with garlic and vinegar, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	And if the bone has wounds and tears, this is how you should treat it: put powder from the mill and ash of the oven on the bone, and put light splints on it, and fasten a splint to the fracture, if you need to; then take a very thick bandage about a palm wide, and wrap it around the splints, and wrap the powder; then take a thin stake three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the top of the bandage is covered; and put the stake on the break, and tie the bandage tight, and fasten the bandage to the bone; and let it rest for a few days, and when you see that the break is holding together, and you can tell clearly that the stake is not moving on the bone, then release it little by little every day, until you feel that the fracture has healed; and it will be healed in about 28 days, and sometimes less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	For the dislocation of the shoulder: Let it be known that when the shoulder is out of place and does not move, and the limb has been misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient; then powder from the mill with a lot of flour, light dustings, put on a double-layered drape; then put on a wide and thin splint, slightly larger than the shoulder width, and tie it tightly in one place; if you employ such a lin thread, so that the splint cuts evenly; then hold it firmly in place, so that the splint does not move from its position, and check it every day; and whenever it loosens, tighten again, and make equal the splint if it has shifted out of place, and lay the patient on his side. And the shoulder will have healed in 20 or 25 days; and when this number is complete, then release it, and be sure, for it is not bone that has shifted easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out forward and there is no support for it, then turn it over, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the femur to calm down an abscess with heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the break of the leg
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The leg is never broken in the middle, but it does happen sometimes; but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it bends towards the inside, and the patient feels great pain, and there is no support, and sometimes he vomits blood, and the skin splits open over the broken bone, and he can feel it well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lie down on his back, and put a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and gently make it even in all ways as much as possible so that the figure of the bone is like this; then wrap it in a cloth, and place it on the bone with the plaster, or whatever is lighter, and tie it firmly, and untie it every hour, and if it relaxes, tighten it; and if it needs to be removed for corrosion or itching that comes to the surface, or pain or abscess, hurry up and remove it, and scrape off the plaster, and treat it in a way that suits; then take off the plaster, and tighten it again until it is well.
de la brisure des costes	Of the rupture of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Saves that the rupture of the ribs does not come forth except in great thickness after the back and at the top, and do not bend much unless because they are pale; and the feeling is good at the investigation of them.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoring them is that you make equal the rupture, if it is necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then put the plaster on, and tie it with a strap, if you need to do so.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the rupture of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels great pain and a burning sensation as if he were crying out, for the bone does not close the wound; and it makes him faint, and he has great weakness in his body, and the old ones have put great effort into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some of those who serve say that it is necessary to administer meat that swells the belly, in order to push back the rupture by force.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We don't do this either, unless hot abscesses come, if they haven't yet come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have come, then let them come.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And say that we don't put cups on the place, to draw off the liquid, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the cups don't attract the excesses to the place for the weakness of disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And say that we must cover the place with another dry one in oil, and put tents between the sides to make the area even, then let it be treated with the cure for plague, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain in the spot where the cloth is stretched, then doubt exists for the patient; so it is necessary to split the bone under the affected area, and to put there some tool to keep it in place; and then, it must be carved, gently pulled, and then the two ends of the wound, if they are large, and it must be treated with ointments until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses burst, so dip them in oil, and put them on the fire; and cure while the fire of that which is caused by an abscess, and be gentle on the cost where it should be, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the fracture of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Once comes a breaker at the base of the neck, and there is no pain; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when it has come to any, and you can see whether it will be healthy or not, if you notice that its hands are soft and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick it with a needle, if it does not feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many situations; and if he does not feel it when it is held and does not feel anything when it is pulled, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient is cured, if you put the cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you know whether it is healthy or not, pay attention to whether its muscles are soft, and to the accident that has happened to him and to the movement of wind and excretion without will; and when he is soothed on his belly, if there is excretion without will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is soothed on his back and he tries to move, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is deadly: do not work at all in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come from him, then it is the lighter thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you rub it with hot oil or oil of mutton as long as it is relieved; then put on one of the plasters comfortably and dryly, and tie it up with a string, and order the patient to rest; and do not sleep in the part where he feels pain until he is well.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Et si certains os sont désarticulés, couvrez-les avec du lin ; et assurez l'os, puis joignez les deux lèvres de la plaie, s'elle est grande, avec une couture, puis traitez-la avec de l'onguent en utilisant du char, jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit guérie ; et si le chiés de l'os est brisé, ce qui est appelé le "chiés de la kowe", si vous mettez votre pouche dans votre main gauche, et le placez égal à l'autre main à votre portée, puis appliquez l'emplâtre et le bandage sur , si vous en avez besoin ; puis maintenez-le en place, et s'il y a des os désarticulés, appliquez la pression, et assurez l'os, et traitez la plaie jusqu'à ce qu'elle soit guérie.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	the hip joint fracture
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	As it happens that the hips are broken, and if so, then there is a little bit of pain in the head; and let them be long, and incline to the back, and come to the patient pain in the place, and stabbing, and swelling what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it as long as you are above the break; and know which is the break and what shape it has; and if the break is at the head, so make the break even, as long as it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, so bring the patient up by his stomach, as long as the restoration of that break is made known to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, if you put on plaster, then put on a beam of wood or oak, and remove the break so that it does not move; and engage the place by the sides, as long as the length is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And command the patient to sleep on his side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscess hurts, as long as the abscess is relieved, and put on what we have said before; and then return to restoration, and hold it as it should be, unless there is no bad accident; and that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder's adjutor is that which is between the neck and the top of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two ways: which is that you take a strong rope, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And hang two chains from the II chocks, and tie them high up, and cut the patient on a scaffold; then have one of his arms broken on the pole, as far as it comes to rest, and take a strong rope, and then put it on some heavy object or have it carried down; then make the break even with his hands together, as far as the break returns in the way that should be.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one should send the sick person to his loins, and tie the hand to his neck, then order two ministers that one should tie who is on the brisurer to his hands, and the others should tie all his limbs, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then tie the limbs all together, and on the brachium, and extend each minister to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the brachium is near the shoulder, then it is necessary to put the limb all together, and at the base of the brachium, and likewise towards the shoulder; and so that the brachium is even on its side, and even at the base; then make the brachium even, as it should be, and hold it, if abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if the abscess breaks out, do not remove it until at least seven days have passed, and place a wet cloth or oil on it until the abscess is calm; then remove it, and the way to remove it is that you put the poultice on the break, then bring the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and wrap a blanket around it, and remove it from the break and from the arm so that the arm is in its place, if nothing hurts it or if the bone has not been broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use a splint, and put a wider and stronger splint on the break than the others, and leave two inches of space between each splint, and make each splint large enough to go over the break III inches on each side; then remove it with more force and less movement as I said at the beginning about the poultice on the break.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the star and the stringing, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the incision warm, let it tie up until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each of the three days the thread, so that itching does not arise or come to place, or the re-shaping does not come to the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the splint, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if such an accident does not come, if only the splint is removed after three or more days, and the patient sleeps on his back, and has his hands on his stomach; and he sets the shoulder joint straight with a smooth piece of linen, and each hour checks whether the broken member no longer moves, or has become softer; if it heals by the power of medicine, and he gives him the food that we have described in a certain way, so that the food is at the first subtle level; and when it begins to recover, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is fitting that the shoulder and leg should be healed in forty days from today; and then, it must be loosened and bath and medicine for healing should be applied to it.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightness is bad and blocked, if it takes one or two months to loosen it up.
de la brisure du bras	from the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fosciles", one small and one large; the small is at the top, and the large is below it; perhaps one or both of them might break, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small foscile is broken, the healing is easy and good; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad and painful, and more so than when both of them are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small dark spot that is bruised alone, then what is needed is to gently stretch it out and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	If it is the large dark spot, then what is needed is to stretch it more forcefully; and extend it on one cussin, and shade the pouchet of the hand further up than the others, and the small ones lower than the others, and so that the patient crosses over himself, and the cussin in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the ministers of his arms to the part affected on his side, or his leg, and other ministers on the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	Then let it be made even according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is in pieces from the break, then let each one be put in its place, and if any of them grasp the other, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do so onto the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the cauterization there is a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; if he takes the cure.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the restoration by cauterization there come abscesses, then I will cover them with a plaster made of oil and rosin, which is not too hard nor too soft; and I will cover them from above gently, until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then cut the cerotide, and I will put the plaster of the powder of the mill with much honey, then put the splints, and let the splint of the cauterization be closer to the arm or leg; and draw it up more than other parts, and always less on moving away, as I said at the beginning of the chapter of the plaster; and may the plasters that are over the cauterization be soft and moist, and not too hard nor too rough; and let the thread, from which it is drawn, be made of linen, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if some bad accident comes to the member, as when itch comes to the member, it is convenient that you warm the member with hot water, until the itch is calmed; and let the member not be tight but rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then recommence the extraction, and if the ligaments are softened and the bone is dislocated, and similar things, then treat it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if it should not come to the member because it is too tight, then you must make it soft a little, and leave it thus for a few days, until the tightening comes again, and then extract it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the illness, then take off the shoulder for 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or if he has broken his neck, then let him hold his hands by his sides, and let his necks be even, and keep them from movement and shaking, and sleep on his back; and know that this breaker is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and perhaps in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the broken hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	are often many breaks in the back of the hand and there comes but little pain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	When the palm of the hand is broken or cracked, so that the patient cries out and stands upright with his hand even before him; then put his hand on a extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, and make them even, as they should be; and put plaster and staples, if there is an abscess, then put a staff according to the quantity of the place; and let it be wrapped in I sheets of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if it breaks in the garden between the root of the plant, then make a staff of reeds, and command the sick person to tie it to its broken root; and then extract it with a long reed, and be careful not to cut off so much of the plant from the hand as the plant from the root, and extract it, if so is fitting.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if it breaks at the end, then you should put a staff on it, and another under the plant, so that the hands are open and straight, then tie it all around the hand, and tighten the bond between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if it breaks at one of the two ends, then you should make it even, as it is fitting; and extract it with the plant, and if you see that you need to put a small straight staff to raise the break, so that it does not move; and if the break is at one of the other two, then make it even, and bind it to the sound one next to it; or you can bind them all together, holding them tightly, or you can put a staff on it, as if you were carrying an arrow; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of the apoplexy, and assist those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the chest bruise
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The rib of the chest is often bruised, and we can clearly see it move forward and backward when it returns; and the healing process is good if we bind it above the bruise and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then sets his ministers equally to his sides; and it is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the chest, then one of the ties is towards the thumb and the other is towards the heel of the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then one of the ties is to the leg and the other is to the heel of the break; and so put the slab with the bone in its natural position, and then place the plaster, and bind it, unless there are any breaks in the leg.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess, let it cool then return to your work and your treatment; the time has come in some way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	And if there is an abscess, let it cool then return to your work and your treatment; the time has come in some way. The wound should be cleaned with salt water, and the surplus fluid should be allowed to drain, then the leg should be wrapped in a dry cloth;  a long bandage should be tied between the thigh and the leg, and the knee joint should be protected with another bandage; and then the bandages should be applied to the wound, and an armature of wood or metal placed on the bone of the leg. Then fix the bandage tightly between the thigh and the leg, so that there is no movement; then two or three turnings of cloth should be placed over the wound to protect it, and a turning of cloth should be placed under the knee joint, and the chief turning of cloth should be fixed to the top; and then the bandages should be tied tightly around the thigh and leg, and the cloth beneath the knee should be fixed in place. Then the bandage should be loosed slightly, so that there is no more pain or swelling; and then two turns of cloth that you have tied between the leg and the thigh should be uncovered, and the three turns above them should be uncovered, and then return to the joint at the top, as far as the foot can move; and let the bandage remain in place until there is no more pain or swelling.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if it slips and moves away from its place, and moves the one that comes to it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that hold onto it, then he should pull it hard, if he can; and if he cannot, then he should split the place, and tear it out forcefully; and heal him as we have said, until he is well.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the chest injured when we put staples there, as in the shoulder or arm; but a restoration made in this way does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the chest is restored in one day, or little more or little less, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of the ankle
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	And know that in the street of the ankle there is little injury, but it bleeds many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, unless it is just a crack or a gash, and goes to all parts, and feels no pain, and this can be felt well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that one should make even what is long at both ends, as much as possible; then put on the plaster, and put on a round splint if you need it, and hold it in place as it should be, then apply all the provisions we have spoken of in other breaks, such as a hot poultice and others; then put on whatever injury it is, as long as it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg break
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 know that in the leg there are II bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all other breaks are the same as those of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones break together, the leg turns around everywhere.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if his subtle nose is broken, then turn back.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick nose is broken, then one feels great pain and it can be seen well; and turn back.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then bring it out, and make it even, and tie the joints evenly; however, the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, so that the extension is smaller and lighter; and align it according to your art.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have finished your work, then take two thick hair of the person's leg on either side, and let them run along the leg from the ankle up to the toe; then wrap them around twice above and below, and tie them in the middle, so that the leg does not tilt towards one side or the other, and so is good; and no one should administer a balm to the long hair, and if it is rough, and put on the wound where there is pain; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; and if the cure as far as it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	About the break of the bones of the feet
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	About the ankle, there is no break at all, but from the bones of the feet there comes a break in some cases, and in most situations there comes only a fracture, and it has never been seen to occur on its own.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the feet, and you see these bones sticking out one above the other, so that the patient has to put his foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then now place your foot on their two ends, raise them up until they go back into their places; then apply the plaster and plug it in, and tie a small piece of cloth over the navel of the foot, then wrap several drapes around, and other things that you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones even if they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, if you restore them, as we have said to the hands of a man; then put on the broken one a stone according to its length from the two, and let it be a little wider, then put under it the foot that I said, and strain ahead; and if there are II or III or more, broken, then put on each of them a stone according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and strain the foot under the stone; and be on the top of the head of the foot the belly of the stone so that it bleeds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I said about the other breakers, when we have said it; and heal each injury as it deserves.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone of the knuckle
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the female nature is broken, if she sits enlarged, then lean her to the part of the back, and hold her behind; then fill the cavity of the nature with cotton, and put in it as big as I sit; then remove the woman, and lift her back little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and bring the bone with the seat; and when she wants to urinate, if she jumps the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it down, and so do for seven days or less: then will be restored the break, and will die, take a bladder of lamb, and tie a chain to the hernia, and pour all the bladder into the nature; then blow in the chain form, until the bladder is gone inside: the nature will then come back the break; then fill with cotton, and leave it for some days, until he is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the man's or woman's jaw is broken, if he sets it as we have said in the hip bone; and these breakages are not hidden from him who makes his study and use of them, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaking means many good things in the right way of restoration: understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an goose's neck and fill it with urine; then wrap it in a cloth and leave it wrapped for three days or so, and it will be healed by the hospital's means.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For those who have broken a bone with a wound, even if it is a large one, such as the hip or shoulder or arm, let them be healed now, so that the wounds that we have spoken of may testify to their healing.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, but the vitriol burns, then, if you have nothing else, continue to restore the break in the same hour, or else the abscesses will come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if the abscesses come out, but continue to leave it until another day, as long as the abscesses are calm and you don't touch them nor on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the side that is covered with the wound, it is necessary that you place it at a slight angle with your hand, at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not equal so that you can make them the same length as your hands, take this iron instrument which has seven or eight inches in length and its width corresponds to the quantity of the wound; and because it is necessary to bend it three or four times according to what is needed in each cure of a broken bone; and be round and a little thick so that it does not press on the limb at your work, and be curved forward and thick in the middle so:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palanquin", for it is necessary that the curved shoulder be placed on top of the head of the visible bone; and let it be set once, until it comes back, and even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instrument cannot take the bone well, you must chop the head of the bone until the instrument has the ability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable tool, either an incisor or a chisel, within your power; then resect that which is delayed in the bone of roughness and small scoops.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone has been reset, and the patient feels great pain after it, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do so that it is in its place, then soak the dressing in black vinager properly if it is in it; and do not put on any wax or other oil where there is oil, lest it bring about corruption and decay; and administer the medicine when you have restored the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, and cover it all around with the covering, according to the quantity of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not tightened with the fracture; and many times this has been done to the misfortune, and have brought up on the patient either death or decay; and let the instruments be softer and more pliable than those of other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a worse accident will not come, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not good to put on splints; but wrap hard drapes around, instead of splints, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days to the wound, if an arrow that you have put there has come out, and put on it a healing ointment, as healing tar and similar things;
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at night, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the arrow runs down easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if every day it passes, and he cannot hold it in place, but it comes apart again, because there are little pieces of bone, so that you must take the wound with a towel, and those little pieces of bone that come out cause pain;
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to light, or some other kind of corruption, then you must cure it according to what he said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opened on a limb, as in the case of the hip or shoulder bone, and other large bones, do not draw it out, for many die from it, but leave it to rot; perhaps after XX or XXX days, then heal the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruses that come from the sudure
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Come often we come after the health of the break, especially when it is near a joint, and it is a ugly thing to see the limb's figure; and perhaps cannot make the limbs do their natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore that we do not break it again: if you administer stinky medicines, as in aloe, incense, myrrh, and sarcocollo, acaice, and others like them, so that you do not press any of these things, or all together, and confound them with wine that is stinky or with a lot of egg or with honey; and put them on the nodules in piles, and bind them well, and do not take them off for many days; and then take them off, and start again on another one, until the nodules are hard; or you put it on a piece of skin that is well made; because the property of the skin is that it makes all swellings on the limbs hard: and if the nodule has already turned to stone, it is necessary to cut it off, so that the excess appears; or you take it to any barber, as long as it is hard, and heal it as long as it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member that is weak after the garrison
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break in the bone has healed, and there remains weakness and tenderness of the limbs for one or more of the following reasons: either because it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because it had too many bindings, and could not move the limb; or because of many wounds; or because of too much movement, not at the right time; or because there is a lack of blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat well and make the body tender, so that the blood increases in it; and give him baths, and provide pleasure and rest; then put wax on the limb, so that the wax attracts much healing, and rinse it often with warm water, until the healing goes into the limb; and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	two injured limbs after sickness
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and the bone is broken open, and the form of the limb is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that one must break the limb completely new, for many foolish people have done this in our land; but such practices are blamed, and great harm and perhaps death result. However, if the knots and torments are fresh, they should be heated with warm water, or soft herbs are cooked, such as foils of whale oil, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and the unguent is made soft, such as a well-made hydrogel, and you take the musk oil of whale oil, and confound it with beef fat or sisament oil, and make an unguent; or you take fig pastes, and grind them with hay of colon, and similar medicines that soften the pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the arm raised by continuous and prolonged friction with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And make sure there is no movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if it is twisted and stiffened, as in the case of a bone, then it must be opened with the iron, covering up to the bone, cutting with a very light knife; and put on ointment and study in the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, if it is now necessary to bring back sensibly.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one is delayed, and the joints swell, and perhaps he is put back in place at his own pace; because then it cannot move at its own pace: many times brings in pain and other pains; nevertheless, when this will come, let the sick person be made well, leaving him until the abscess is appeased; then raise the member with warm water and oil, and then move it lightly, and cure each member as the cure comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chaplets for the dislocations of the shoulder joint up to the edge of the breastbone.
des mandibules	the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	And there are two ways that the mandible should be dislocated: one is slightly out of place and a little soft; another is completely displaced and hangs down towards the chin, causing the saliva to flow from the mouth so that it cannot be held or the mouth closed, and envelops the tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, return it with several different positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and complete, you must immediately reset it, without delay; and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the sick person, and pour a little water from one of their hands into the root of the dislocation of the mandible inside the mouth, for there are two ways of setting it: and the other two hands should be placed apart to make it even; and order the patient that he softens his mandíbula bones, and moves them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let the mirror be made equal, as soon as it revives in its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And let it be brought back with care, especially if the two mandibles are together, so that they are heated with cold water and oil, as soon as they are brought back slightly; do not wait to bring them back, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back evenly, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with a softener, if put on sheets wet with an oil made of rose and wax, then let it lie lightly; and let the patient sleep on his back, and his shoulders be between two pillows, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor strive to open his mouth, but eat leichtily, as soon as the pain is gone, and the mandibles are healed; and then eat whatever you want, and do not try to open your mouth to eat or drink, until the mandible is well healed and whole.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset within an hour, and are not restored to their places, so that there come fevers and sudden pains used, and by chance stomachache, and by chance vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then you know that it is a sign of death; and many die within nine days.
de la forcelle	for the fork
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	does not dislocate due to a lack of movement from within the bone and from the top, and does not dislocate at all towards the back, and one can feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down on his back, and extends his arms; and then press the joint with your palm, and it will come back; then put on the plaster and bandage, and bind it; and the jaw that is toward the neck cannot be dislocated; unless, and if it does not dislocate at all, so he returns to his place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and bind it, and command the patient to rest until he is well; and in this way the shoulder is also reset when it has been dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of shoulder dislocation
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	1. That the shoulder dislocates only in three ways: first, that it comes out of place at the end of the arm; and second, at the top of the thigh bone; and perhaps it comes out of place at the back of the shoulder, but not; and does not come out of place from within towards the neck; and many times comes out of place towards the shoulder blade, but at those who have little strength, for then must they be taken to hospital; and at those who have enough strength, let them go back and rest.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	2. And perhaps it happens to some men that there is beating or breaking, and the shoulder becomes hot with an abscess, and they think that it has dislocated.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	3. So then you must test it out, until you are sure of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is caused by dislocations when it goes down the ascendant, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest difference; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hole, and remove the ascendant to the table the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor make any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, unless it is hidden, for you will find it manifestly on the table; and this way of dislocation is not but to be brought back, when it is new, or when the bone is broken.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers hold the hand of the patient at the top, then put their thumb behind the shoulder, and hold the joint up to force it into place; and the ministers hold the hand, and extend it upwards, and then put it back; so will it come gradually.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said in our days later, it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and soft and soothing vapor is brought, as an infusion of althaea and fenugrec and melilote in water, and is applied; then the patient is wrapped in linen so as not to be too cold or too hot, then the shoulder is gently raised with a stick of another equal length, neither too soft nor too hard, then the patient's heel is placed on the stick, and the head of the shoulder is gently lifted with care, and the hand of the patient is pulled; and other ministers douse the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; this shoulder returns immediately, and if you do it like this: there is a man who is bigger than the patient; and he stands on one side, and lifts the shoulder with the help of another, and raises the shoulder up, so that the patient hangs in the air; and other ministers pull the hand of the patient downward toward the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then with him there is nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And if he is too light, then with him there is nothing heavy, and the dislocation returns now. Thus also: and it is that a long poker is placed in the earth, whose head is also like a pistol, and is not too large nor too small; then let it be laid upon the patient, but let there be a drape of tow on top, and the patient is lying on the long poker; then let his hand be extended downward from another side, making the joint return to its place carefully; and if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then this cure is: take a poker of II arms of great and IIII hands wide, which has the head re-enters in perfect desoz the assele, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lie on the head down a long strap so that it does not hurt the patient, then put the shoulder in its socket; and extend your arms over the long bar, and set the aid on the bar, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm over a loop of a rope with a large loop, and let the hands hang down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now be in place.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	Then, in whichever way it is, if you put an equal woolen sphere in place of the socket, then put the plaster ready with powder from the mill, with incense and ambergris around the entire shoulder and neck, then remove the socket gradually, and tie the thread to the plaster, and embrace the hand at its collar, and let the hands remain like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he vomit a little as long as the members are comfortable, for he will heal sooner; and then vomit more after 5 or 7 days, and move them; and if they are firm and not softened, then they are healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has come out of place due to moisture or some other cause, you must apply the cauterization three times, as it is done with the paste of the cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and he does not stand after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm up, then you know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and you know that the joint has never been put back in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is toward the loin and the breasts, or behind, is made by an impact, and stretching of the hands, and I apply another place; and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after recovery the member comes with a shake and slow move, so often does the patient use it, until that shake is healed, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of dislocation of the head
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	is dislocated at the shoulder is dislocated to extremes, and extremes returns; and if it is dislocated from all sides, and most especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for we can see it well and feel it well; and dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the injured shoulder with the healthy one, so that you can see it openly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is chopped, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in such a way that the chest comes first, for if the chest comes first, then it would be a grief to reset it; and perhaps cannot be reset from all sides altogether, especially at the back; so it is less than other dislocations, but it causes great pain, and perhaps brings death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is so, when it is such that one can bring it back, that you extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands at the base of the thumb according to the wrist around, backwards and forwards, and bring the joint into its place together with its little fingers or at the root of its palm until it comes back to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation in front, so that it returns when it doubles its hand to its place, and tightens the joint at the root of its palm where it has come loose.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not return to its place, so administer strong extension; and that two minister extend the arm, and bend it two sides, so that it does not move with the extension; then turn the arm of each side, then that you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth; and when you see the joint joined to its hand, then oil it with any oil to soften the joint, then bring the joint together, until it returns; and when it is in its place, then put it on dry plaster with ointment of sheep's fat, and pull it together, and tie the arm to the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then let go.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen it and leave it; and if you see that the joint is not well put together, then begin to plaster it again and tighten it, and leave it for a certain number of days, until it is firmly set. Then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels painful after the joint is moved back into place and moves, then bathe it and rub well, and press until it is relieved; or put sheepswool grease on the joint, then leave it for a day and a night, then wrap it, and let it enter or bathe; and when it sweats, rub the joint well, then put the grease back on, and then go in or bathe; and do this II times or III, until it is healed; and if you see, then put a piece of warm wool fat on it, and strain it on; then return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	the dislocation of the hand is reduced, and its return is lighter than that of other joints However, it is necessary to put it back in place immediately after it has been reduced, so that the joints do not swell, or an abscess develops.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you put the sick hand on a tray, extend the fingers and make them even, so that the palm faces the joint location, and keep it in this position until it has recovered; however, you must check whether it is well positioned; then put the sick person's back hand on a tray for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	If the dislocation is at the back of the hand, put the sick person's back hand on a tray, and make the palm face the joint location.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good; but if it does not, then extract the pustules by means of gentle pressing and let it be thus unencumbered.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	If he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back into place after some days, then the joint is twisted; and there is no need to worry if his hands are wet, and he cannot extract anything at all: so know that his nerves are cut or his arteries; unless there is another cause except to extract it by means of a delicate cautery, and perhaps there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the poultice on it that we have said, then extract it and leave it for 5 days, then change it and leave it like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If he cannot move it well, and there is no fracture, if the wet hot water, and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	of the dislocation of the two bones of the hand in either direction, neither at the back of the palm nor the abdomen; therefore they are fixed, and the dislocation is removed to the fingers as long as it revives, then support the head of the two bones, and turn it towards the joint part, and leave it there for a day, and then make it equal that day; and if it comes loose again, so do you, and move it and fix it again; and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same thing if it is dislocated on the abdomen of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do likewise when it is dislocated from the other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the shoulder from behind
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no cure, because it quickly kills the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the excrement does not come out willingly, cannot be held back, and often one of the limbs is weakened, or the II legs or II arms or I And often the eschinae move in four directions; that which moves to the rear is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you should reward it if gilbositez comes from childhood: if there is no cure or recovery of all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from sitting down or striking or similar things, the ancient ways of curing it with great words did not bring much benefit to it; but I have simplified it according to my understanding, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the gangrene that comes from the tip of the toe, there is no cure or treatment; and likewise what comes straight from the sides, and can only be properly treated that which comes from behind, as I said; and it is that the sick person lies on his back in an even position, and has his legs free so he does not get hurt; then put a bit of wood on his head in the form of a pile, and another one at his feet, and tie a string between them behind the sick person, and another one at his ankles, and at his knees; and two servants know the strings, one on top and the other at the feet, between the two piles; and they are very tight, like I said before, and the mirror puts his palms on the spine in the form of a pile, until he recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	If it does not return to its place with this treatment, take a table of three arms long, and cut off the corner of the wall, and put the patient on one side; then bottle the head of the table onto the wall, then set the middle of the table on the spine; and set his hands on the other chief of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do so with a turner that turns your hand.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	Et when it is even, put on a dried plaster with an abundance of ash, and then the staples, and then the straw of a tablet of three quarters long, that may turn red to its place of the gibbosity and the part of the spine sound, and tie it with a string, as we have said, and use the patient of subtle fasting until he is healthy; and if anything comes at the end of health, then administer medicines softening and soothing, with the straw that we have said above; and never give him a piece of flannel, and never does the appearance come in the rear spine from the back, and take care that it is dislocations; and this is the bone that opens because one should not have presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Here is the translation of the provided text: 
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Saiches that the joints of the hip and the shoulder come only in dislocations alone, not at all as other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to IV parties: inside and outside, before and behind; and more inside there, and less displaced before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocations inside is that when you joint the leg that is sick with the healthy, it is more distant, and the joints of the patient's knees are higher than those of the healthy, and the patient cannot double his knee; and this is the place that is swollen hot with abscess because the head of the thigh comes in.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those to whom it comes from behind is that this accident is opposite to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of those to whom it comes before are that their leg is well according to the accomplishment; however, they do not double their knee with pain, and if you make them walk, they cannot go forward, and they hold back their urine, and swell their ankles, and when they walk, they step on their heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the hip bone is in place between the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	And the signs of him who is behind, if he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is soft, and the hip bone is in place between the ribs. If these dislocations are old, and they delay according to their disposition, there is no cure; and it only comes that he has presumed.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in those who have fresh dislocations, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset the joint, and it turns inward and outward, and moves to the right and left; perhaps it will come back, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this way, it is necessary that you prepare the minister very strongly, and hold the leg very firmly with two hands, or with one link that is tied to the knee; and other ministers extend their hand above in such a way that they press their hands down on their peers, then tie a string around a foot; and other ministers take the head of the line; and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient has been raised from the ground once, and stays there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to four resemblances, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	And if not, it is necessary to put the cure on his sound side, then place the link on the root of the thigh, and the string that is away from the ankle, then extend the link upwards towards the ankle, and upwards towards the force; then grip the arms of other ministers, and embrace the thick leg of the ill thigh, and stretch it in a line: so it will return to its place now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this way that we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the sick together with a strong rope from the heel, and from the knees, and let the leg of the sick be extended more than the other; then hang him by the head on a post, and let his two arms be above the ground; then command the minister that he embrace the head of the chest, and let there be others who hang with the sick who embrace the chest well, for now the joints are returning to their hospital.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are away, so lay the sick, as we have said in that which has gibbosity, and strap the rope properly on the leg of the sick, and on the foot also; then put two torches, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick one torch between the thighs of the sick in the form; and let there be wet drapes placed around, so that it does not burn the sick, then extend each minister towards him, and let the minister look at the dislocation equally with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place on a .ie. bed, and press as we have said in the gibosity, and lay the patient on the left side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocations are in front, if it is convenient to extend the leg of the patient further away, and according to what I have said; and make him lean his weight on the other hand, and press it down towards the ankle, then take the weight off with the other hand.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocations are in the back, if it is not convenient to extend the patient's leg further away, and do not raise up on the ground, but rather that he should be lying on his side as if he were extended as described above; and lie on his face, and keep the leg extended as we have said before, and press on the joint towards the table; and it will be complete when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then take off the bandage, put on the plaster, and tie it up with a bandage, so that the hunchback does not move; and let him rest for III or IV days, then remove the plaster, and make him bleat until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: namely, inward, outward, and backward; it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his knee to his chest, and if he does not bend it to his chest, knowing that he is dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his kneecap with your palms, and pull it between your two legs, then bend the II ribs of the knee cap together; and other ministers extend his foot, until the knee has returned to its place, and the signs are that he is bending his leg to his chest easily; and put the plaster on, and make him walk with his leg bent to his chest, and join them firmly together for III days or IIII, then let it go; and do not work the patient to walk until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not in place, if you administer a strong extension, as we said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation from the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never dislocated, and never fully displaced inward or outward.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is displaced, and the bend before the part where it is displaced: one must gently ram it with their hands when it is only slightly dislocated.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is displaced all the way, you must make the patient lie down right side up, and stretch it out on the leg below the ankle; then draw it up towards your hand, and then let it fall back down again; and do this twice, as we have said, stretching and drawing the foot; if it returns, it is good; but if not, then begin the work again, for it will return; and if it cannot return, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and place a staff firmly in the ground between his knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then have one minister stretch out the leg at his side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then have one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, so that they may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then let one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then have one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then let one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then have one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then let one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then have one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then let one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then have one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the patient falls back down; then pull him up again, and this time let him fall forward; then do this three times, if possible; then have the minister who is holding the peg place himself between the patient's knees, and tie the blankets around him so that he does not slip; then make the patient sit up, and place the peg under his foot; then let one minister stretch out the leg at their side, and another at the foot, that he may hold fast to the peg; then each minister should stretch equally, and the peg should be placed right next to the patient's knee so that they can hold on to it when you stretch them out; then place the minister holding the peg equal to the dislocation in his hands, and one other minister stretches out the sound leg at their side, and holds it there; then let go of the peg so that the the
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is done, so put on the plaster and press it down, and let the splint form, and fasten the foot to the leg, and guard the ankles that are behind the ankle, so that the bonds are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and the bonds will become soft if the splint is left; then remove it on the third day or fourth day, and let the patient go away after four days; and if he goes before that term, there is still a danger that it will dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come up, so calm them down as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	The two of them.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, so it is a good idea to stretch them smoothly without work, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no place at the foot of the two legs, so it is a good idea to make the patient sit on a flat bed or on a table completely upright, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press your foot down until it has healed; and when it is even, and there is nothing open, so make a splint with a board at the two legs, then form the splint, and leave it for three days, then remove it; and let him rest, until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	for wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	For wounds come with dislocation, and we must restore them, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not learned in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not compassionate and tardy, do not be bold; and use at first soothing ointments, and leave the patient to God, unless you see a chance of health; and when you see a chance, now restore the limb to its place, so that warm blood comes; and when the limb is in place, administer drying ointments, and if there is fracture with small bones broken, do as we have said for simple illnesses; and beware of going down the path of fear, according to what I said, because it will cost you much according to your Creator, and for the sake of arming and protecting yourself and your body.
Amen	Amen
